A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM

Now , fair Hippolyta , our nuptial hour 
Draws on apace : four happy days bring in 
Another moon ; but O ! methinks how slow 
This old moon wanes ; she lingers my desires ,
Like to a step dame , or a dowager 
Long withering out a young man's revenue .

Four days will quickly steep themselves in night ;
Four nights will quickly dream away the time ;
And then the moon , like to a silver bow 
New-bent in heaven , shall behold the night 
Of our solemnities .

Go , Philostrate ,
Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments ;
Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth ;
Turn melancholy forth to funerals ;
The pale companion is not for our pomp .

Hippolyta , I woo'd thee with my sword ,
And won thy love doing thee injuries ;
But I will wed thee in another key ,
With pomp , with triumph , and with revelling .


Happy be Theseus , our renowned duke !

Thanks , good Egeus : what's the news with thee ?

Full of vexation come I , with complaint 
Against my child , my daughter Hermia .
Stand forth , Demetrius . My noble lord ,
This man hath my consent to marry her .
Stand forth , Lysander : and , my gracious duke ,
This man hath bewitch'd the bosom of my child :
Thou , thou , Lysander , thou hast given her rimes ,
And interchang'd love-tokens with my child ;
Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung ,
With feigning voice , verses of feigning love ;
And stol'n the impression of her fantasy 
With bracelets of thy hair , rings , gawds , conceits ,
Knacks , trifles , nosegays , sweetmeats , messengers 
Of strong prevailment in unharden'd youth ;
With cunning hast thou filch'd my daughter's heart ;
Turn'd her obedience , which is due to me ,
To stubborn harshness . And , my gracious duke ,
Be it so she will not here before your Grace 
Consent to marry with Demetrius ,
I beg the ancient privilege of Athens ,
As she is mine , I may dispose of her ;
Which shall be either to this gentleman ,
Or to her death , according to our law 
Immediately provided in that case .

What say you , Hermia ? be advis'd , fair maid .
To you , your father should be as a god ;
One that compos'd your beauties , yea , and one 
To whom you are but as a form in wax 
By him imprinted , and within his power 
To leave the figure or disfigure it .
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman .

So is Lysander .

In himself he is ;
But , in this kind , wanting your father's voice ,
The other must be held the worthier .

I would my father look'd but with my eyes .

Rather your eyes must with his judgment look .

I do entreat your Grace to pardon me .
I know not by what power I am made bold ,
Nor how it may concern my modesty 
In such a presence here to plead my thoughts ;
But I beseech your Grace , that I may know 
The worst that may befall me in this case ,
If I refuse to wed Demetrius .

Either to die the death , or to abjure 
For ever the society of men .
Therefore , fair Hermia , question your desires ;
Know of your youth , examine well your blood ,
Whe'r , if you yield not to your father's choice ,
You can endure the livery of a nun ,
For aye to be in shady cloister mew'd ,
To live a barren sister all your life ,
Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon .
Thrice blessed they that master so their blood ,
To undergo such maiden pilgrimage ;
But earthlier happy is the rose distill'd ,
Than that which withering on the virgin thorn 
Grows , lives , and dies , in single blessedness .

So will I grow , so live , so die , my lord ,
Ere I will yield my virgin patent up 
Unto his lordship , whose unwished yoke 
My soul consents not to give sovereignty .

Take time to pause ; and , by the next new moon ,
The sealing-day betwixt my love and me 
For everlasting bond of fellowship ,
Upon that day either prepare to die 
For disobedience to your father's will ,
Or else to wed Demetrius , as he would ;
Or on Diana's altar to protest 
For aye austerity and single life .

Relent , sweet Hermia ; and , Lysander , yield 
Thy crazed title to my certain right .

You have her father's love , Demetrius ;
Let me have Hermia's : do you marry him .

Scornful Lysander ! true , he hath my love ,
And what is mine my love shall render him ;
And she is mine , and all my right of her 
I do estate unto Demetrius .

I am , my lord , as well deriv'd as he ,
As well possess'd ; my love is more than his ;
My fortunes every way as fairly rank'd 
If not with vantage , as Demetrius' ;
And , which is more than all these boasts can be ,
I am belov'd of beauteous Hermia .
Why should not I then prosecute my right ?
Demetrius , I'll avouch it to his head ,
Made love to Nedar's daughter , Helena ,
And won her soul ; and she , sweet lady , dotes ,
Devoutly dotes , dotes in idolatry ,
Upon this spotted and inconstant man .

I must confess that I have heard so much ,
And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof ;
But , being over-full of self-affairs ,
My mind did lose it . But , Demetrius , come ;
And come , Egeus ; you shall go with me ,
I have some private schooling for you both .
For you , fair Hermia , look you arm yourself 
To fit your fancies to your father's will ,
Or else the law of Athens yields you up ,
Which by no means we may extenuate ,
To death , or to a vow of single life .
Come , my Hippolyta : what cheer , my love ?
Demetrius and Egeus , go along :
I must employ you in some business 
Against our nuptial , and confer with you 
Of something nearly that concerns yourselves .

With duty and desire we follow you .


How now , my love ! Why is your cheek so pale ?
How chance the roses there do fade so fast ?

Belike for want of rain , which I could well 
Beteem them from the tempest of mine eyes .

Ay me ! for aught that ever I could read ,
Could ever hear by tale or history ,
The course of true love never did run smooth ;
But , either it was different in blood ,

O cross ! too high to be enthrall'd to low .

Or else misgraffed in respect of years ,

O spite ! too old to be engag'd to young .

Or else it stood upon the choice of friends ,

O hell ! to choose love by another's eye .

Or , if there were a sympathy in choice ,
War , death , or sickness did lay siege to it ,
Making it momentany as a sound ,
Swift as a shadow , short as any dream ,
Brief as the lightning in the collied night ,
That , in a spleen , unfolds both heaven and earth ,
And ere a man hath power to say , 'Behold !' 
The jaws of darkness do devour it up :
So quick bright things come to confusion .

If then true lovers have been ever cross'd ,
It stands as an edict in destiny :
Then let us teach our trial patience ,
Because it is a customary cross ,
As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs ,
Wishes and tears , poor fancy's followers .

A good persuasion : therefore , hear me , Hermia .
I have a widow aunt , a dowager 
Of great revenue , and she hath no child :
From Athens is her house remote seven leagues ;
And she respects me as her only son .
There , gentle Hermia , may I marry thee ,
And to that place the sharp Athenian law 
Cannot pursue us . If thou lov'st me then ,
Steal forth thy father's house to-morrow night ,
And in the wood , a league without the town ,
Where I did meet thee once with Helena ,
To do observance to a morn of May ,
There will I stay for thee .

My good Lysander !
I swear to thee by Cupid's strongest bow ,
By his best arrow with the golden head ,
By the simplicity of Venus' doves ,
By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves ,
And by that fire which burn'd the Carthage queen ,
When the false Troyan under sail was seen ,
By all the vows that ever men have broke ,
In number more than ever women spoke ,
In that same place thou hast appointed me ,
To-morrow truly will I meet with thee .

Keep promise , love . Look , here comes Helena .


God speed fair Helena ! Whither away ?

Call you me fair ? that fair again unsay .
Demetrius loves your fair : O happy fair !
Your eyes are lode-stars ! and your tongue's sweet air 
More tuneable than lark to shepherd's ear ,
When wheat is green , when hawthorn buds appear .
Sickness is catching : O ! were favour so ,
Yours would I catch , fair Hermia , ere I go ;
My ear should catch your voice , my eye your eye ,
My tongue should catch your tongue's sweet melody .
Were the world mine , Demetrius being bated ,
The rest I'd give to be to you translated .
O ! teach me how you look , and with what art 
You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart .

I frown upon him , yet he loves me still .

O ! that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill .

I give him curses , yet he gives me love .

O ! that my prayers could such affection move .

The more I hate , the more he follows me .

The more I love , the more he hateth me .

His folly , Helena , is no fault of mine .

None , but your beauty : would that fault were mine !

Take comfort : he no more shall see my face ;
Lysander and myself will fly this place .
Before the time I did Lysander see ,
Seem'd Athens as a paradise to me :
O ! then , what graces in my love do dwell ,
That he hath turn'd a heaven unto a hell .

Helen , to you our minds we will unfold .
To-morrow night , when Ph be doth behold 
Her silver visage in the wat'ry glass ,
Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass ,
A time that lovers' flights doth still conceal ,
Through Athens' gates have we devis'd to steal .

And in the wood , where often you and I 
Upon faint primrose-beds were wont to lie ,
Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet ,
There my Lysander and myself shall meet ;
And thence from Athens turn away our eyes ,
To seek new friends and stranger companies .
Farewell , sweet playfellow : pray thou for us ;
And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius !
Keep word , Lysander : we must starve our sight 
From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight .

I will , my Hermia .

Helena , adieu :
As you on him , Demetrius dote on you !


How happy some o'er other some can be !
Through Athens I am thought as fair as she ;
But what of that ? Demetrius thinks not so ;
He will not know what all but he do know ;
And as he errs , doting on Hermia's eyes ,
So I , admiring of his qualities .
Things base and vile , holding no quantity ,
Love can transpose to form and dignity .
Love looks not with the eyes , but with the mind ,
And therefore is wing'd Cupid painted blind .
Nor hath Love's mind of any judgment taste ;
Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste :
And therefore is Love said to be a child ,
Because in choice he is so oft beguil'd .
As waggish boys in game themselves forswear ,
So the boy Love is perjur'd every where ;
For ere Demetrius look'd on Hermia's eyne ,
He hail'd down oaths that he was only mine ;
And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt ,
So he dissolv'd , and showers of oaths did melt .
I will go tell him of fair Hermia's flight :
Then to the wood will he to-morrow night 
Pursue her ; and for this intelligence 
If I have thanks , it is a dear expense :
But herein mean I to enrich my pain ,
To have his sight thither and back again .


Is all our company here ?

You were best to call them generally , man by man , according to the scrip .

Here is the scroll of every man's name , which is thought fit , through all Athens , to play in our interlude before the duke and the duchess on his wedding-day at night .

First , good Peter Quince , say what the play treats on ; then read the names of the actors , and so grow to a point .

Marry , our play is , The most lamentable comedy , and most cruel death of Pyramus and Thisby .

A very good piece of work , I assure you , and a merry . Now , good Peter Quince , call forth your actors by the scroll . Masters , spread yourselves .

Answer as I call you . Nick Bottom , the weaver .

Ready . Name what part I am for , and proceed .

You , Nick Bottom , are set down for Pyramus .

What is Pyramus ? a lover , or a tyrant ?

A lover , that kills himself most gallantly for love .

That will ask some tears in the true performing of it : if I do it , let the audience look to their eyes ; I will move storms , I will condole in some measure . To the rest : yet my chief humour is for a tyrant . I could play Ercles rarely , or a part to tear a cat in , to make all split .

The raging rocks 
And shivering shocks 
Shall break the locks 
Of prison gates :
And Phibbus' car 
Shall shine from far 
And make and mar 
The foolish Fates .

This was lofty ! Now name the rest of the players . This is Ercles' vein , a tyrant's vein ; a lover is more condoling .

Francis Flute , the bellows-mender .

Here , Peter Quince .

You must take Thisby on you .

What is Thisby ? a wandering knight ?

It is the lady that Pyramus must love .

Nay , faith , let not me play a woman ; I have a beard coming .

That's all one : you shall play it in a mask , and you may speak as small as you will .

An I may hide my face , let me play Thisby too . I'll speak in a monstrous little voice , 'Thisne , Thisne !' 'Ah , Pyramus , my lover dear ; thy Thisby dear , and lady dear !' 

No , no ; you must play Pyramus ; and Flute , you Thisby .

Well , proceed .

Robin Starveling , the tailor .

Here , Peter Quince .

Robin Starveling , you must play Thisby's mother . Tom Snout , the tinker .

Here , Peter Quince .

You , Pyramus's father ; myself , Thisby's father ; Snug , the joiner , you the lion's part : and , I hope , here is a play fitted .

Have you the lion's part written ? pray you , if it be , give it me , for I am slow of study .

You may do it extempore , for it is nothing but roaring .

Let me play the lion too . I will roar , that I will do any man's heart good to hear me ; I will roar , that I will make the duke say , 'Let him roar again , let him roar again .' 

An you should do it too terribly , you would fright the duchess and the ladies , that they would shriek ; and that were enough to hang us all .

That would hang us , every mother's son .

I grant you , friends , if that you should fright the ladies out of their wits , they would have no more discretion but to hang us ; but I will aggravate my voice so that I will roar you as gently as any sucking dove ; I will roar you as 'twere any nightingale .

You can play no part but Pyramus ; for Pyramus is a sweet-faced man ; a proper man , as one shall see in a summer's day ; a most lovely , gentleman-like man ; therefore , you must needs play Pyramus .

Well , I will undertake it . What beard were I best to play it in ?

Why , what you will .

I will discharge it in either your straw-colour beard , your orange-tawny beard , your purple-in-grain beard , or your French-crown colour beard , your perfect yellow .

Some of your French crowns have no hair at all , and then you will play bare-faced . But masters , here are your parts ; and I am to entreat you , request you , and desire you , to con them by to-morrow night , and meet me in the palace wood , a mile without the town , by moonlight : there will we rehearse ; for if we meet in the city , we shall be dogged with company , and our devices known . In the meantime I will draw a bill of properties , such as our play wants . I pray you , fail me not .

We will meet ; and there we may rehearse more obscenely and courageously . Take pains ; be perfect ; adieu .

At the duke's oak we meet .

Enough ; hold , or cut bow-strings .

How now , spirit ! whither wander you ?


Over hill , over dale ,
Thorough bush , thorough brier ,
Over park , over pale ,
Thorough flood , thorough fire ,
I do wander every where ,
Swifter than the moone's sphere ;
And I serve the fairy queen ,
To dew her orbs upon the green :
The cowslips tall her pensioners be ;
In their gold coats spots you see ;
Those be rubies , fairy favours ,
In their freckles live their savours :

I must go seek some dew-drops here ,
And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear .
Farewell , thou lob of spirits : I'll be gone ;
Our queen and all her elves come here anon .

The king doth keep his revels here to-night .
Take heed the queen come not within his sight ;
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath ,
Because that she as her attendant hath 
A lovely boy , stol'n from an Indian king ;
She never had so sweet a changeling ;
And jealous Oberon would have the child 
Knight of his train , to trace the forests wild ;
But she , perforce , withholds the loved boy ,
Crowns him with flowers , and makes him all her joy .
And now they never meet in grove , or green ,
By fountain clear , or spangled starlight sheen ,
But they do square ; that all their elves , for fear ,
Creep into acorn-cups and hide them there .

Either I mistake your shape and making quite ,
Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite 
Call'd Robin Goodfellow : are you not he 
That frights the maidens of the villagery ;
Skim milk , and sometimes labour in the quern ,
And bootless make the breathless housewife churn ;
And sometime make the drink to bear no barm ;
Mislead night-wanderers , laughing at their harm ?
Those that Hobgoblin call you and sweet Puck ,
You do their work , and they shall have good luck :
Are you not he ?

Fairy , thou speak'st aright ;
I am that merry wanderer of the night .
I jest to Oberon , and make him smile 
When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile ,
Neighing in likeness of a filly foal :
And sometime lurk I in a gossip's bowl ,
In very likeness of a roasted crab ;
And , when she drinks , against her lips I bob 
And on her wither'd dewlap pour the ale .
The wisest aunt , telling the saddest tale ,
Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me ;
Then slip I from her bum , down topples she ,
And 'tailor' cries , and falls into a cough ;
And then the whole quire hold their hips and loff ;
And waxen in their mirth , and neeze , and swear 
A merrier hour was never wasted there .
But , room , fairy ! here comes Oberon .

And here my mistress . Would that he were gone !


Ill met by moonlight , proud Titania .

What ! jealous Oberon . Fairies , skip hence :
I have forsworn his bed and company .

Tarry , rash wanton ! am not I thy lord ?

Then , I must be thy lady ; but I know 
When thou hast stol'n away from fairy land ,
And in the shape of Corin sat all day ,
Playing on pipes of corn , and versing love 
To amorous Phillida . Why art thou here ,
Come from the furthest steppe of India ?
But that , forsooth , the bouncing Amazon ,
Your buskin'd mistress and your warrior love ,
To Theseus must be wedded , and you come 
To give their bed joy and prosperity .

How canst thou thus for shame , Titania ,
Glance at my credit with Hippolyta ,
Knowing I know thy love to Theseus ?
Didst thou not lead him through the glimmering night 
From Perigouna , whom he ravished ?
And make him with fair  gle break his faith ,
With Ariadne , and Antiopa ?

These are the forgeries of jealousy :
And never , since the middle summer's spring ,
Met we on hill , in dale , forest , or mead ,
By paved fountain , or by rushy brook ,
Or in the beached margent of the sea ,
To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind ,
But with thy brawls thou hast disturb'd our sport .
Therefore the winds , piping to us in vain ,
As in revenge , have suck'd up from the sea 
Contagious fogs ; which , falling in the land ,
Have every pelting river made so proud 
That they have overborne their continents :
The ox hath therefore stretch'd his yoke in vain ,
The ploughman lost his sweat , and the green corn 
Hath rotted ere his youth attain'd a beard :
The fold stands empty in the drowned field ,
And crows are fatted with the murrion flock ;
The nine men's morris is fill'd up with mud ,
And the quaint mazes in the wanton green 
For lack of tread are undistinguishable :
The human mortals want their winter here :
No night is now with hymn or carol blest :
Therefore the moon , the governess of floods ,
Pale in her anger , washes all the air ,
That rheumatic diseases do abound :
And thorough this distemperature we see 
The seasons alter : hoary-headed frosts 
Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose ,
And on old Hiems' thin and icy crown 
An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds 
Is , as in mockery , set . The spring , the summer ,
The childing autumn , angry winter , change 
Their wonted liveries , and the mazed world ,
By their increase , now knows not which is which .
And this same progeny of evil comes 
From our debate , from our dissension :
We are their parents and original .

Do you amend it then ; it lies in you .
Why should Titania cross her Oberon ?
I do but beg a little changeling boy ,
To be my henchman .

Set your heart at rest ;
The fairy land buys not the child of me .
His mother was a votaress of my order :
And , in the spiced Indian air , by night ,
Full often hath she gossip'd by my side ,
And sat with me on Neptune's yellow sands ,
Marking the embarked traders on the flood ;
When we have laugh'd to see the sails conceive 
And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind ;
Which she , with pretty and with swimming gait 
Following ,her womb then rich with my young squire ,
Would imitate , and sail upon the land ,
To fetch me trifles , and return again ,
As from a voyage , rich with merchandise .
But she , being mortal , of that boy did die ;
And for her sake I do rear up her boy ,
And for her sake I will not part with him .

How long within this wood intend you stay ?

Perchance , till after Theseus' weddingday .
If you will patiently dance in our round ,
And see our moonlight revels , go with us ;
If not , shun me , and I will spare your haunts .

Give me that boy , and I will go with thee .

Not for thy fairy kingdom . Fairies , away !
We shall chide downright , if I longer stay .


Well , go thy way : thou shalt not from this grove 
Till I torment thee for this injury .
My gentle Puck , come hither . Thou remember'st 
Since once I sat upon a promontory ,
And heard a mermaid on a dolphin's back 
Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath ,
That the rude sea grew civil at her song ,
And certain stars shot madly from their spheres 
To hear the sea-maid's music .

I remember .

That very time I saw , but thou couldst not ,
Flying between the cold moon and the earth ,
Cupid all arm'd : a certain aim he took 
At a fair vestal throned by the west ,
And loos'd his love-shaft smartly from his bow ,
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts ;
But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft 
Quench'd in the chaste beams of the wat'ry moon ,
And the imperial votaress passed on ,
In maiden meditation , fancy-free .
Yet mark'd I where the bolt of Cupid fell :
It fell upon a little western flower ,
Before milk-white , now purple with love's wound ,
And maidens call it , Love-in-idleness .
Fetch me that flower ; the herb I show'd thee once :
The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid 
Will make or man or woman madly dote 
Upon the next live creature that it sees .
Fetch me this herb ; and be thou here again 
Ere the leviathan can swim a league .

I'll put a girdle round about the earth 
In forty minutes .


Having once this juice 
I'll watch Titania when she is asleep ,
And drop the liquor of it in her eyes :
The next thing then she waking looks upon ,
Be it on lion , bear , or wolf , or bull ,
On meddling monkey , or on busy ape ,
She shall pursue it with the soul of love :
And ere I take this charm off from her sight ,
As I can take it with another herb ,
I'll make her render up her page to me .
But who comes here ? I am invisible ,
And I will overhear their conference .


I love thee not , therefore pursue me not .
Where is Lysander and fair Hermia ?
The one I'll slay , the other slayeth me .
Thou told'st me they were stol'n into this wood ;
And here am I , and wood within this wood ,
Because I cannot meet my Hermia .
Hence ! get thee gone , and follow me no more .

You draw me , you hard-hearted adamant :
But yet you draw not iron , for my heart 
Is true as steel : leave you your power to draw ,
And I shall have no power to follow you .

Do I entice you ? Do I speak you fair ?
Or , rather , do I not in plainest truth 
Tell you I do not nor I cannot love you ?

And even for that do I love you the more .
I am your spaniel ; and , Demetrius ,
The more you beat me , I will fawn on you :
Use me but as your spaniel , spurn me , strike me ,
Neglect me , lose me ; only give me leave ,
Unworthy as I am , to follow you .
What worser place can I beg in your love ,
And yet a place of high respect with me ,
Than to be used as you use your dog ?

Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit ,
For I am sick when I do look on you .

And I am sick when I look not on you .

You do impeach your modesty too much ,
To leave the city , and commit yourself 
Into the hands of one that loves you not ;
To trust the opportunity of night 
And the ill counsel of a desert place 
With the rich worth of your virginity .

Your virtue is my privilege : for that 
It is not night when I do see your face ,
Therefore I think I am not in the night ;
Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company ,
For you in my respect are all the world :
Then how can it be said I am alone ,
When all the world is here to look on me ?

I'll run from thee and hide me in the brakes ,
And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts .

The wildest hath not such a heart as you .
Run when you will , the story shall be chang'd ;
Apollo flies , and Daphne holds the chase ;
The dove pursues the griffin ; the mild hind 
Makes speed to catch the tiger : bootless speed ,
When cowardice pursues and valour flies .

I will not stay thy questions : let me go ;
Or , if thou follow me , do not believe 
But I shall do thee mischief in the wood .

Ay , in the temple , in the town , the field ,
You do me mischief . Fie , Demetrius !
Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex .
We cannot fight for love , as men may do ;
We should be woo'd and were not made to woo .

I'll follow thee and make a heaven of hell ,
To die upon the hand I love so well .


Fare thee well , nymph : ere he do leave this grove ,
Thou shalt fly him , and he shall seek thy love .

Hast thou the flower there ? Welcome , wanderer .

Ay , there it is .

I pray thee , give it me .
I know a bank whereon the wild thyme blows ,
Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows 
Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine ,
With sweet musk-roses , and with eglantine :
There sleeps Titania some time of the night ,
Lull'd in these flowers with dances and delight ;
And there the snake throws her enamell'd skin ,
Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in :
And with the juice of this I'll streak her eyes ,
And make her full of hateful fantasies .
Take thou some of it , and seek through this grove :
A sweet Athenian lady is in love 
With a disdainful youth : anoint his eyes ;
But do it when the next thing he espies 
May be the lady . Thou shalt know the man 
By the Athenian garments he hath on .
Effect it with some care , that he may prove 
More fond on her than she upon her love .
And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow .

Fear not , my lord , your servant shall do so .


Come , now a roundel and a fairy song ;
Then , for the third of a minute , hence ;
Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds ,
Some war with rere-mice for their leathern wings ,
To make my small elves coats , and some keep back 
The clamorous owl , that nightly hoots , and wonders 
At our quaint spirits . Sing me now asleep ;
Then to your offices , and let me rest .

The Fairies sing .


I .

You spotted snakes with double tongue ,
Thorny hedge-hogs , be not seen ;
Newts , and blind-worms , do no wrong ;
Come not near our fairy queen .
Philomel , with melody ,
Sing in our sweet lullaby :
Lulla , lulla , lullaby ; lulla , lulla , lullaby :
Never harm ,
Nor spell , nor charm ,
Come our lovely lady nigh ;
So , good night , with lullaby .

II .

Weaving spiders come not here ;
Hence , you long-legg'd spinners , hence !
Beetles black , approach not near ;
Worm nor snail , do no offence .
Philomel , with melody ,  &c .


Hence , away ! now all is well .
One aloof stand sentinel .

What thou seest when thou dost wake ,
Do it for thy true-love take ;
Love and languish for his sake :
Be it ounce , or cat , or bear ,
Pard , or boar with bristled hair ,
In thy eye that shall appear 
When thou wak'st , it is thy dear .
Wake when some vile thing is near .

Fair love , you faint with wandering in the wood ;
And to speak troth , I have forgot our way :
We'll rest us , Hermia , if you think it good ,
And tarry for the comfort of the day .

Be it so , Lysander : find you out a bed ,
For I upon this bank will rest my head .

One turf shall serve as pillow for us both ;
One heart , one bed , two bosoms , and one troth .

Nay , good Lysander ; for my sake , my dear ,
Lie further off yet , do not lie so near .

O ! take the sense , sweet , of my innocence ,
Love takes the meaning in love's conference .
I mean that my heart unto yours is knit ,
So that but one heart we can make of it ;
Two bosoms interchained with an oath ;
So then two bosoms and a single troth .
Then by your side no bed-room me deny ,
For , lying so , Hermia , I do not lie .

Lysander riddles very prettily :
Now much beshrew my manners and my pride ,
If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied .
But , gentle friend , for love and courtesy 
Lie further off ; in human modesty ,
Such separation as may well be said 
Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid ,
So far be distant ; and , good night , sweet friend .
Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end !

Amen , amen , to that fair prayer , say I ;
And then end life when I end loyalty !

Here is my bed : sleep give thee all his rest !

With half that wish the wisher's eyes be press'd !


Through the forest have I gone ,
But Athenian found I none ,
On whose eyes I might approve 
This flower's force in stirring love .
Night and silence ! who is here ?
Weeds of Athens he doth wear :
This is he , my master said ,
Despised the Athenian maid ;
And here the maiden , sleeping sound ,
On the dank and dirty ground .
Pretty soul ! she durst not lie 
Near this lack-love , this kill-courtesy .

Churl , upon thy eyes I throw 
All the power this charm doth owe .
When thou wak'st , let love forbid 
Sleep his seat on thy eyelid :
So awake when I am gone ;
For I must now to Oberon .


Stay , though thou kill me , sweet Demetrius .

I charge thee , hence , and do not haunt me thus .

O ! wilt thou darkling leave me ? do not so .

Stay , on thy peril : I alone will go .


O ! I am out of breath in this fond chase .
The more my prayer , the lesser is my grace .
Happy is Hermia , wheresoe'er she lies ;
For she hath blessed and attractive eyes .
How came her eyes so bright ? Not with salt tears :
If so , my eyes are oftener wash'd than hers .
No , no , I am as ugly as a bear ;
For beasts that meet me run away for fear ;
Therefore no marvel though Demetrius 
Do , as a monster , fly my presence thus .
What wicked and dissembling glass of mine 
Made me compare with Hermia's sphery eyne ?
But who is here ? Lysander ! on the ground !
Dead ? or asleep ? I see no blood , no wound .
Lysander , if you live , good sir , awake .

And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake .
Transparent Helena ! Nature shows art ,
That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart .
Where is Demetrius ? O ! how fit a word 
Is that vile name to perish on my sword .

Do not say so , Lysander ; say not so .
What though he love your Hermia ? Lord ! what though ?
Yet Hermia still loves you : then be content .

Content with Hermia ! No : I do repent 
The tedious minutes I with her have spent .
Not Hermia , but Helena I love :
Who will not change a raven for a dove ?
The will of man is by his reason sway'd ,
And reason says you are the worthier maid .
Things growing are not ripe until their season ;
So I , being young , till now ripe not to reason ;
And touching now the point of human skill ,
Reason becomes the marshal to my will ,
And leads me to your eyes ; where I o'erlook 
Love's stories written in love's richest book .

Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born ?
When at your hands did I deserve this scorn ?
Is't not enough , is't not enough , young man ,
That I did never , no , nor never can ,
Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius' eye ,
But you must flout my insufficiency ?
Good troth , you do me wrong , good sooth , you do ,
In such disdainful manner me to woo .
But fare you well : perforce I must confess 
I thought you lord of more true gentleness .
O ! that a lady of one man refus'd ,
Should of another therefore be abus'd .


She sees not Hermia . Hermia , sleep thou there ;
And never mayst thou come Lysander near .
For , as a surfeit of the sweetest things 
The deepest loathing to the stomach brings ;
Or , as the heresies that men do leave 
Are hated most of those they did deceive :
So thou , my surfeit and my heresy ,
Of all be hated , but the most of me !
And , all my powers , address your love and might 
To honour Helen , and to be her knight .


Help me , Lysander , help me ! do thy best 
To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast .
Ay me , for pity ! what a dream was here !
Lysander , look how I do quake with fear :
Methought a serpent eat my heart away ,
And you sat smiling at his cruel prey .
Lysander ! what ! remov'd ?Lysander ! lord !
What ! out of hearing ? gone ? no sound , no word ?
Alack ! where are you ? speak , an if you hear ;
Speak , of all loves ! I swound almost with fear .
No ! then I well perceive you are not nigh :
Either death or you I'll find immediately .

Are we all met ?

Pat , pat ; and here's a marvellous convenient place for our rehearsal . This green plot shall be our stage , this hawthorn-brake our tiring-house ; and we will do it in action as we will do it before the duke .

Peter Quince ,

What sayst thou , bully Bottom ?

There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisby that will never please . First , Pyramus must draw a sword to kill himself , which the ladies cannot abide . How answer you that ?

By'r lakin , a parlous fear .

I believe we must leave the killing out , when all is done .

Not a whit : I have a device to make all well . Write me a prologue ; and let the prologue seem to say , we will do no harm with our swords , and that Pyramus is not killed indeed ; and , for the more better assurance , tell them that I , Pyramus , am not Pyramus , but Bottom the weaver : this will put them out of fear .

Well , we will have such a prologue , and it shall be written in eight and six .

No , make it two more : let it be written in eight and eight .

Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion ?

I fear it , I promise you .

Masters , you ought to consider with yourselves : to bring in ,God shield us !a lion among ladies , is a most dreadful thing ; for there is not a more fearful wild-fowl than your lion living , and we ought to look to it .

Therefore , another prologue must tell he is not a lion .

Nay , you must name his name , and half his face must be seen through the lion's neck ; and he himself must speak through , saying thus , or to the same defect , 'Ladies ,' or , 'Fair ladies ,' 'I would wish you ,' or , 'I would request you ,' or , 'I would entreat you , not to fear , not to tremble : my life for yours . If you think I come hither as a lion , it were pity of my life : no , I am no such thing : I am a man as other men are ;' and there indeed let him name his name , and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner .

Well , it shall be so . But there is two hard things , that is , to bring the moonlight into a chamber ; for , you know , Pyramus and Thisby meet by moonlight .

Doth the moon shine that night we play our play ?

A calendar , a calendar ! look in the almanack ; find out moonshine , find out moonshine .

Yes , it doth shine that night .

Why , then may you leave a casement of the great chamber-window , where we play , open ; and the moon may shine in at the casement .

Ay ; or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and a lanthorn , and say he comes to disfigure , or to present , the person of Moonshine . Then , there is another thing : we must have a wall in the great chamber ; for Pyramus and Thisby , says the story , did talk through the chink of a wall .

You can never bring in a wall . What say you , Bottom ?

Some man or other must present Wall ; and let him have some plaster , or some loam , or some rough-cast about him , to signify wall ; and let him hold his fingers thus , and through that cranny shall Pyramus and Thisby whisper .

If that may be , than all is well . Come , sit down , every mother's son , and rehearse your parts . Pyramus , you begin : when you have spoken your speech , enter into that brake ; and so every one according to his cue .


What hempen home-spuns have we swaggering here ,
So near the cradle of the fairy queen ?
What ! a play toward ; I'll be an auditor ;
An actor too perhaps , if I see cause .

Speak , Pyramus .Thisby , stand forth .

Thisby , the flowers have odious savours sweet ,

Odorous , odorous .

odours savours sweet :
So hath thy breath , my dearest Thisby dear . But hark , a voice ! stay thou but here awhile ,
And by and by I will to thee appear .


A stranger Pyramus than e'er play'd here !


Must I speak now ?

Ay , marry , must you ; for you must understand , he goes but to see a noise that he heard , and is to come again .

Most radiant Pyramus , most lily-white of hue ,
Of colour like the red rose on triumphant brier ,
Most brisky juvenal , and eke most lovely Jew ,
As true as truest horse that yet would never tire ,
I'll meet thee , Pyramus , at Ninny's tomb .

'Ninus' tomb ,' man . Why , you must not speak that yet ; that you answer to Pyramus : you speak all your part at once , cues and all . Pyramus , enter : your cue is past ; it is 'never tire .' 

O !As true as truest horse , that yet would never tire .


If I were , fair Thisby , I were only thine .

O monstrous ! O strange ! we are haunted .
Pray , masters ! fly , masters !Help !


I'll follow you , I'll lead you about a round ,
Through bog , through bush , through brake , through brier :
Sometime a horse I'll be , sometime a hound ,
A hog , a headless bear , sometime a fire ;
And neigh , and bark , and grunt , and roar , and burn ,
Like horse , hound , hog , bear , fire , at every turn .


Why do they run away ? this is a knavery of them to make me afeard .


O Bottom , thou art changed ! what do I see on thee ?

What do you see ? you see an ass-head of your own , do you ?

Bless thee , Bottom ! bless thee ! thou art translated .


I see their knavery : this is to make an ass of me ; to fright me , if they could . But I will not stir from this place , do what they can : I will walk up and down here , and I will sing , that they shall hear I am not afraid .

The ousel-cock , so black of hue ,
With orange-tawny bill ,
The throstle with his note so true ,
The wren with little quill .


What angel wakes me from my flowery bed ?


The finch , the sparrow , and the lark ,
The plain-song cuckoo gray ,
Whose note full many a man doth mark ,
And dares not answer , nay ;

for indeed , who would set his wit to so foolish a bird ? who would give a bird the lie , though he cry 'cuckoo' never so ?

I pray thee , gentle mortal , sing again :
Mine ear is much enamour'd of thy note ;
So is mine eye enthralled to thy shape ;
And thy fair virtue's force , perforce , doth move me ,
On the first view , to say , to swear , I love thee .

Methinks , mistress , you should have little reason for that : and yet , to say the truth , reason and love keep little company together now-a-days . The more the pity , that some honest neighbours will not make them friends . Nay , I can gleek upon occasion .

Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful .

Not so , neither ; but if I had wit enough to get out of this wood , I have enough to serve mine own turn .

Out of this wood do not desire to go :
Thou shalt remain here , whe'r thou wilt or no .
I am a spirit of no common rate ;
The summer still doth tend upon my state ;
And I do love thee : therefore , go with me ;
I'll give thee fairies to attend on thee ,
And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep ,
And sing , while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep :
And I will purge thy mortal grossness so 
That thou shalt like an airy spirit go .
Pease-blossom ! Cobweb ! Moth ! and Mustardseed !


Ready .

And I .

And I .

And I .

Where shall we go ?

Be kind and courteous to this gentleman ;
Hop in his walks , and gambol in his eyes ;
Feed him with apricocks and dewberries ,
With purple grapes , green figs , and mulberries .
The honey-bags steal from the humble-bees ,
And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs ,
And light them at the fiery glow-worm's eyes ,
To have my love to bed , and to arise ;
And pluck the wings from painted butterflies 
To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes :
Nod to him , elves , and do him courtesies .

Hail , mortal !

Hail !

Hail !

Hail !

I cry your worships mercy , heartily : I beseech your worship's name .

Cobweb .

I shall desire you of more acquaintance , good Master Cobweb : if I out my finger , I shall make bold with you . Your name , honest gentleman ?

Pease-blossom .

I pray you , commend me to Mistress Squash , your mother , and to Master Peascod , your father . Good Master Pease-blossom , I shall desire you of more acquaintance too . Your name , I beseech you , sir ?

Mustard-seed .

Good Master Mustard-seed , I know your patience well : that same cowardly , giant-like ox-beef hath devoured many a gentleman of your house . I promise you , your kindred hath made my eyes water ere now . I desire you of more acquaintance , good Master Mustard-seed .

Come , wait upon him ; lead him to my bower .
The moon methinks , looks with a watery eye ;
And when she weeps , weeps every little flower ,
Lamenting some enforced chastity .
Tie up my love's tongue , bring him silently .


I wonder if Titania be awak'd ;
Then , what it was that next came in her eye ,
Which she must dote on in extremity .
Here comes my messenger .


How now , mad spirit !

What night-rule now about this haunted grove ?

My mistress with a monster is in love .
Near to her close and consecrated bower ,
While she was in her dull and sleeping hour ,
A crew of patches , rude mechanicals ,
That work for bread upon Athenian stalls ,
Were met together to rehearse a play 
Intended for great Theseus' nuptial day .
The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort ,
Who Pyramus presented in their sport 
Forsook his scene , and enter'd in a brake ,
When I did him at this advantage take ;
An ass's nowl I fixed on his head :
Anon his Thisbe must be answered ,
And forth my mimick comes . When they him spy ,
As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye ,
Or russet-pated choughs , many in sort ,
Rising and cawing at the gun's report ,
Sever themselves , and madly sweep the sky ;
So , at his sight , away his fellows fly ,
And , at our stamp , here o'er and o'er one falls ;
He murder cries , and help from Athens calls .
Their sense thus weak , lost with their fears thus strong ,
Made senseless things begin to do them wrong ;
For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch ;
Some sleeves , some hats , from yielders all things catch .
I led them on in this distracted fear ,
And left sweet Pyramus translated there ;
When in that moment , so it came to pass ,
Titania wak'd and straightway lov'd an ass .

This falls out better than I could devise .
But hast thou yet latch'd the Athenian's eyes 
With the love-juice , as I did bid thee do ?

I took him sleeping ,that is finish'd too ,
And the Athenian woman by his side ;
That , when he wak'd , of force she must be ey'd .


Stand close : this is the same Athenian .

This is the woman ; but not this the man .

O ! why rebuke you him that loves you so ?
Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe .

Now I but chide ; but I should use thee worse ,
For thou , I fear , hast given me cause to curse .
If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep ,
Being o'er shoes in blood , plunge in knee deep ,
And kill me too .
The sun was not so true unto the day 
As he to me . Would he have stol'n away 
From sleeping Hermia ? I'll believe as soon 
This whole earth may be bor'd , and that the moon 
May through the centre creep , and so displease 
Her brother's noontide with the Antipodes .
It cannot be but thou hast murder'd him ;
So should a murderer look , so dead , so grim .

So should the murder'd look , and so should I ,
Pierc'd through the heart with your stern cruelty ;
Yet you , the murderer , look as bright , as clear ,
As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere .

What's this to my Lysander ? where is he ?
Ah ! good Demetrius , wilt thou give him me ?

I had rather give his carcass to my hounds .

Out , dog ! out , cur ! thou driv'st me past the bounds 
Of maiden's patience . Hast thou slain him then ?
Henceforth be never number'd among men !
O ! once tell true , tell true , e'en for my sake ;
Durst thou have look'd upon him being awake ,
And hast thou kill'd him sleeping ? O brave touch !
Could not a worm , an adder , do so much ?
An adder did it ; for with doubler tongue 
Than thine , thou serpent , never adder stung .

You spend your passion on a mispris'd mood :
I am not guilty of Lysander's blood ,
Nor is he dead , for aught that I can tell .

I pray thee , tell me then that he is well .

An if I could , what should I get therefore ?

A privilege never to see me more .
And from thy hated presence part I so ;
See me no more , whe'r he be dead or no .


There is no following her in this fierce vein :
Here therefore for awhile I will remain .
So sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow 
For debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe ;
Which now in some slight measure it will pay ,
If for his tender here I make some stay .


What hast thou done ? thou hast mistaken quite ,
And laid the love-juice on some true-love's sight :
Of thy misprision must perforce ensue 
Some true-love turn'd , and not a false turn'd true .

Then fate o'er-rules , that , one man holding troth ,
A million fail , confounding oath on oath .

About the wood go swifter than the wind ,
And Helena of Athens look thou find :
All fancy-sick she is , and pale of cheer 
With sighs of love , that cost the fresh blood dear .
By some illusion see thou bring her here :
I'll charm his eyes against she do appear .

I go , I go ; look how I go ;
Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow .

Flower of this purple dye ,
Hit with Cupid's archery ,
Sink in apple of his eye .
When his love he doth espy ,
Let her shine as gloriously 
As the Venus of the sky .
When thou wak'st , if she be by ,
Beg of her for remedy .


Captain of our fairy band ,
Helena is here at hand ,
And the youth , mistook by me ,
Pleading for a lover's fee .
Shall we their fond pageant see ?
Lord , what fools these mortals be !

Stand aside : the noise they make 
Will cause Demetrius to awake .

Then will two at once woo one ;
That must needs be sport alone ;
And those things do best please me 
That befall preposterously .

Why should you think that I should woo in scorn ?
Scorn and derision never come in tears :
Look , when I vow , I weep ; and vows so born ,
In their nativity all truth appears .
How can these things in me seem scorn to you ,
Bearing the badge of faith to prove them true ?

You do advance your cunning more and more .
When truth kills truth , O devilish-holy fray !
These vows are Hermia's : will you give her o'er ?
Weigh oath with oath , and you will nothing weigh :
Your vows , to her and me , put in two scales ,
Will even weigh , and both as light as tales .

I had no judgment when to her I swore .

Nor none , in my mind , now you give her o'er .

Demetrius loves her , and he loves not you .

O Helen ! goddess , nymph , perfect , divine !
To what , my love , shall I compare thine eyne ?
Crystal is muddy . O ! how ripe in show 
Thy lips , those kissing cherries , tempting grow ,
This pure congealed white , high Taurus' snow ,
Fann'd with the eastern wind , turns to a crow 
When thou hold'st up thy hand . O ! let me kiss 
That princess of pure white , this seal of bliss .

O spite ! O hell ! I see you all are bent 
To set against me for your merriment :
If you were civil and knew courtesy ,
You would not do me thus much injury .
Can you not hate me , as I know you do ,
But you must join in souls to mock me too ?
If you were men , as men you are in show ,
You would not use a gentle lady so ;
To vow , and swear , and superpraise my parts ,
When I am sure you hate me with your hearts .
You both are rivals , and love Hermia ,
And now both rivals , to mock Helena :
A trim exploit , a manly enterprise ,
To conjure tears up in a poor maid's eyes 
With your derision ! none of noble sort 
Would so offend a virgin , and extort 
A poor soul's patience , all to make you sport .

You are unkind , Demetrius ; be not so ;
For you love Hermia ; this you know I know :
And here , with all good will , with all my heart ,
In Hermia's love I yield you up my part ;
And yours of Helena to me bequeath ,
Whom I do love , and will do to my death .

Never did mockers waste more idle breath .

Lysander , keep thy Hermia ; I will none :
If e'er I lov'd her , all that love is gone .
My heart with her but as guest wise sojourn'd ,
And now to Helen it is home return'd ,
There to remain .

Helen , it is not so .

Disparage not the faith thou dost not know ,
Lest to thy peril thou aby it dear .
Look ! where thy love comes : yonder is thy dear .


Dark night , that from the eye his function takes ,
The ear more quick of apprehension makes ;
Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense ,
It pays the hearing double recompense .
Thou art not by mine eye , Lysander , found ;
Mine ear , I thank it , brought me to thy sound .
But why unkindly didst thou leave me so ?

Why should he stay , whom love doth press to go ?

What love could press Lysander from my side ?

Lysander's love , that would not let him bide ,
Fair Helena , who more engilds the night 
Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light .
Why seek'st thou me ? could not this make thee know ,
The hate I bear thee made me leave thee so ?

You speak not as you think : it cannot be .

Lo ! she is one of this confederacy .
Now I perceive they have conjoin'd all three 
To fashion this false sport in spite of me .
Injurious Hermia ! most ungrateful maid !
Have you conspir'd , have you with these contriv'd 
To bait me with this foul derision ?
Is all the counsel that we two have shar'd ,
The sister-vows , the hours that we have spent ,
When we have chid the hasty-footed time 
For parting us , O ! is it all forgot ?
All school-days' friendship , childhood innocence ?
We , Hermia , like two artificial gods ,
Have with our neelds created both one flower ,
Both on one sampler , sitting on one cushion ,
Both warbling of one song , both in one key ,
As if our hands , our sides , voices , and minds ,
Had been incorporate . So we grew together ,
Like to a double cherry , seeming parted ,
But yet an union in partition ;
Two lovely berries moulded on one stem ;
So , with two seeming bodies , but one heart ;
Two of the first , like coats in heraldry ,
Due but to one , and crowned with one crest .
And will you rent our ancient love asunder ,
To join with men in scorning your poor friend ?
It is not friendly , 'tis not maidenly :
Our sex , as well as I , may chide you for it ,
Though I alone do feel the injury .

I am amazed at your passionate words .
I scorn you not : it seems that you scorn me .

Have you not set Lysander , as in scorn ,
To follow me and praise my eyes and face ,
And made your other love , Demetrius ,
Who even but now did spurn me with his foot ,
To call me goddess , nymph , divine and rare ,
Precious , celestial ? Wherefore speaks he this 
To her he hates ? and wherefore doth Lysander 
Deny your love , so rich within his soul ,
And tender me , forsooth , affection ,
But by your setting on , by your consent ?
What though I be not so in grace as you ,
So hung upon with love , so fortunate ,
But miserable most to love unlov'd ?
This you should pity rather than despise .

I understand not what you mean by this .

Ay , do , persever , counterfeit sad looks ,
Make mouths upon me when I turn my back ;
Wink each at other ; hold the sweet jest up :
This sport , well carried , shall be chronicled .
If you have any pity , grace , or manners ,
You would not make me such an argument .
But , fare ye well : 'tis partly mine own fault ,
Which death or absence soon shall remedy .

Stay , gentle Helena ! hear my excuse :
My love , my life , my soul , fair Helena !

O excellent !

Sweet , do not scorn her so .

If she cannot entreat , I can compel .

Thou canst compel no more than she entreat :
Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers .
Helen , I love thee ; by my life , I do :
I swear by that which I will lose for thee ,
To prove him false that says I love thee not .

I say I love thee more than he can do .

If thou say so , withdraw , and prove it too .

Quick , come !

Lysander , whereto tends all this ?

Away , you Ethiop !

No , no , he'll  .  .  .
Seem to break loose ; take on , as you would follow ,
But yet come not : you are a tame man , go !

Hang off , thou cat , thou burr ! vile thing , let loose ,
Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent .

Why are you grown so rude ? what change is this ,
Sweet love ,

Thy love ! out , tawny Tartar , out !
Out , loathed medicine ! hated poison , hence !

Do you not jest ?

Yes , sooth ; and so do you .

Demetrius , I will keep my word with thee .

I would I had your bond , for I perceive 
A weak bond holds you : I'll not trust your word .

What ! should I hurt her , strike her , kill her dead ?
Although I hate her , I'll not harm her so .

What ! can you do me greater harm than hate ?
Hate me ! wherefore ? O me ! what news , my love ?
Am not I Hermia ? Are not you Lysander ?
I am as fair now as I was erewhile .
Since night you lov'd me ; yet , since night you left me :
Why , then you left me ,O , the gods forbid !
In earnest , shall I say ?

Ay , by my life ;
And never did desire to see thee more .
Therefore be out of hope , of question , doubt ;
Be certain , nothing truer : 'tis no jest ,
That I do hate thee and love Helena .

O me ! you juggler ! you canker-blossom !
You thief of love ! what ! have you come by night 
And stol'n my love's heart from him ?

Fine , i' faith !
Have you no modesty , no maiden shame ,
No touch of bashfulness ? What ! will you tear 
Impatient answers from my gentle tongue ?
Fie , fie ! you counterfeit , you puppet you !

Puppet ! why , so : ay , that way goes the game .
Now I perceive that she hath made compare 
Between our statures : she hath urg'd her height ;
And with her personage , her tall personage ,
Her height , forsooth , she hath prevail'd with him .
And are you grown so high in his esteem ,
Because I am so dwarfish and so low ?
How low am I , thou painted maypole ? speak ;
How low am I ? I am not yet so low 
But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes .

I pray you , though you mock me , gentlemen ,
Let her not hurt me : I was never curst ;
I have no gift at all in shrewishness ;
I am a right maid for my cowardice :
Let her not strike me . You perhaps may think ,
Because she is something lower than myself ,
That I can match her .

Lower ! hark , again .

Good Hermia , do not be so bitter with me .
I evermore did love you , Hermia ,
Did ever keep your counsels , never wrong'd you ;
Save that , in love unto Demetrius ,
I told him of your stealth unto this wood .
He follow'd you ; for love I follow'd him ;
But he hath chid me hence , and threaten'd me 
To strike me , spurn me , nay , to kill me too :
And now , so you will let me quiet go ,
To Athens will I bear my folly back ,
And follow you no further : let me go :
You see how simple and how fond I am .

Why , get you gone . Who is't that hinders you ?

A foolish heart , that I leave here behind .

What ! with Lysander ?

With Demetrius .

Be not afraid : she shall not harm thee , Helena .

No , sir ; she shall not , though you take her part .

O ! when she's angry , she is keen and shrewd .
She was a vixen when she went to school :
And though she be but little , she is fierce .

'Little' again ! nothing but 'low' and 'little !' 
Why will you suffer her to flout me thus ?
Let me come to her .

Get you gone , you dwarf ;
You minimus , of hindering knot-grass made ;
You bead , you acorn !

You are too officious 
In her behalf that scorns your services .
Let her alone ; speak not of Helena ;
Take not her part , for , if thou dost intend 
Never so little show of love to her ,
Thou shalt aby it .

Now she holds me not ;
Now follow , if thou dar'st , to try whose right ,
Or thine or mine , is most in Helena .

Follow ! nay , I'll go with thee , cheek by jole .


You , mistress , all this coil is 'long of you :
Nay , go not back .

I will not trust you , I ,
Nor longer stay in your curst company .
Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray ,
My legs are longer though , to run away .


I am amaz'd , and know not what to say .


This is thy negligence : still thou mistak'st ,
Or else commit'st thy knaveries wilfully .

Believe me , king of shadows , I mistook .
Did not you tell me I should know the man 
By the Athenian garments he had on ?
And so far blameless proves my enterprise ,
That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes ;
And so far am I glad it so did sort ,
As this their jangling I esteem a sport .

Thou see'st these lovers seek a place to fight :
Hie therefore , Robin , overcast the night ;
The starry welking cover thou anon 
With drooping fog as black as Acheron ;
And lead these testy rivals so astray ,
As one come not within another's way .
Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue ,
Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong ;
And sometime rail thou like Demetrius ;
And from each other look thou lead them thus ,
Till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep 
With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep :
Then crush this herb into Lysander's eye ;
Whose liquor hath this virtuous property ,
To take from thence all error with his might ,
And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight .
When they next wake , all this derision 
Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision ;
And back to Athens shall the lovers wend ,
With league whose date till death shall never end .
Whiles I in this affair do thee employ ,
I'll to my queen and beg her Indian boy ;
And then I will her charmed eye release 
From monster's view , and all things shall be peace .

My fairy lord , this must be done with haste ,
For night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast ,
And yonder shines Aurora's harbinger ;
At whose approach , ghosts , wandering here and there ,
Troop home to churchyards : damned spirits all ,
That in cross-ways and floods have burial ,
Already to their wormy beds are gone ;
For fear lest day should look their shames upon ,
They wilfully themselves exile from light ,
And must for aye consort with black-brow'd night .

But we are spirits of another sort .
I with the morning's love have oft made sport ;
And , like a forester , the groves may tread ,
Even till the eastern gate , all fiery-red ,
Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams ,
Turns into yellow gold his salt green-streams .
But , notwithstanding , haste ; make no delay :
We may effect this business yet ere day .

Up and down , up and down ;
I will lead them up and down :
I am fear'd in field and town ;
Goblin , lead them up and down .

Here comes one .


Where art thou , proud Demetrius ? speak thou now .

Here , villain ! drawn and ready . Where art thou ?

I will be with thee straight .

Follow me , then ,
To plainer ground .

Lysander ! speak again .
Thou runaway , thou coward , art thou fled ?
Speak ! In some bush ? Where dost thou hide thy head ?

Thou coward ! art thou bragging to the stars ,
Telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars ,
And wilt not come ? Come , recreant ; come , thou child ;
I'll whip thee with a rod : he is defil'd 
That draws a sword on thee .

Yea , art thou there ?

Follow my voice : we'll try no manhood here .

He goes before me and still dares me on :
When I come where he calls , then he is gone .
The villain is much lighter-heel'd than I :
I follow'd fast , but faster he did fly ;
That fallen am I in dark uneven way ,
And here will rest me .

Come , thou gentle day !
For if but once thou show me thy grey light ,
I'll find Demetrius and revenge this spite .

Ho ! ho ! ho ! Coward , why com'st thou not ?

Abide me , if thou dar'st ; for well I wot 
Thou runn'st before me , shifting every place ,
And dar'st not stand , nor look me in the face .
Where art thou now ?

Come hither : I am here .

Nay then , thou mock'st me . Thou shalt buy this dear ,
If ever I thy face by daylight see :
Now , go thy way . Faintness constraineth me 
To measure out my length on this cold bed :
By day's approach look to be visited .

O weary night ! O long and tedious night ,
Abate thy hours ! shine , comforts , from the east !
That I may back to Athens by daylight ,
From these that my poor company detest :
And sleep , that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye ,
Steal me awhile from mine own company .

Yet but three ? Come one more ;
Two of both kinds make up four .
Here she comes , curst and sad :
Cupid is a knavish lad ,
Thus to make poor females mad .

Never so weary , never so in woe ,
Bedabbled with the dew and torn with briers ,
I can no further crawl , no further go ;
My legs can keep no pace with my desires .
Here will I rest me till the break of day .
Heavens shield Lysander , if they mean a fray !

On the ground 
Sleep sound :
I'll apply 
To your eye ,
Gentle lover , remedy 

When thou wak'st ,
Thou tak'st 
True delight 
In the sight 
Of thy former lady's eye :
And the country proverb known ,
That every man should take his own ,
In your waking shall be shown :
Jack shall have Jill ;
Nought shall go ill ;
The man shall have his mare again ,
And all shall be well .


Come , sit thee down upon this flowery bed ,
While I thy amiable cheeks do coy ,
And stick musk-roses in thy sleek smooth head ,
And kiss thy fair large ears , my gentle joy .

Where's Pease-blossom ?

Ready .

Scratch my head , Pease-blossom . Where's Mounsieur Cobweb ?

Ready .

Mounsieur Cobweb , good mounsieur , get your weapons in your hand , and kill me a red-hipped humble-bee on the top of a thistle ; and , good mounsieur , bring me the honey-bag . Do not fret yourself too much in the action , mounsieur ; and , good mounsieur , have a care the honey-bag break not ; I would be loath to have you overflown with a honey-bag , signior . Where's Mounsieur Mustard-seed ?

Ready .

Give me your neaf , Mounsieur Mustard-seed . Pray you , leave your curtsy , good mounsieur .

What's your will ?

Nothing , good mounsieur , but to help Cavalery Cobweb to scratch . I must to the barber's , mounsieur , for methinks I am marvellous hairy about the face ; and I am such a tender ass , if my hair do but tickle me , I must scratch .

What , wilt thou hear some music , my sweet love ?

I have a reasonable good ear in music : let us have the tongs and the bones .

Or say , sweet love , what thou desir'st to eat .

Truly , a peck of provender : I could munch your good dry oats . Methinks I have a great desire to a bottle of hay : good hay , sweet hay , hath no fellow .

I have a venturous fairy that shall seek 
The squirrel's hoard , and fetch thee thence new nuts .

I had rather have a handful or two of dried pease . But , I pray you , let none of your people stir me : I have an exposition of sleep come upon me .

Sleep thou , and I will wind thee in my arms .
Fairies , be gone , and be all ways away .

So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle 
Gently entwist ; the female ivy so 
Enrings the barky fingers of the elm .
O ! how I love thee ; how I dote on thee !

Welcome , good Robin . See'st thou this sweet sight ?
Her dotage now I do begin to pity :
For , meeting her of late behind the wood ,
Seeking sweet favours for this hateful fool ,
I did upbraid her and fall out with her ;
For she his hairy temples then had rounded 
With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers ;
And that same dew , which sometime on the buds 
Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls ,
Stood now within the pretty flowerets' eyes 
Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail .
When I had at my pleasure taunted her ,
And she in mild terms begg'd my patience ,
I then did ask of her her changeling child ;
Which straight she gave me , and her fairy sent 
To bear him to my bower in fairy land .
And now I have the boy , I will undo 
This hateful imperfection of her eyes :
And , gentle Puck , take this transformed scalp 
From off the head of this Athenian swain ,
That he , awaking when the other do ,
May all to Athens back again repair ,
And think no more of this night's accidents 
But as the fierce vexation of a dream .
But first I will release the fairy queen .


Be as thou wast wont to be ;
See as thou wast wont to see :
Dian's bud o'er Cupid's flower 
Hath such force and blessed power .

Now , my Titania ; wake you , my sweet queen .

My Oberon ! what visions have I seen !
Methought I was enamour'd of an ass .

There lies your love .

How came these things to pass ?
O ! how mine eyes do loathe his visage now .

Silence , awhile . Robin , take off this head .
Titania , music call ; and strike more dead 
Than common sleep of all these five the sense .

Music , ho ! music ! such as charmeth sleep .


When thou wak'st , with thine own fool's eyes peep .

Sound , music !

Come , my queen , take hands with me ,
And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be .
Now thou and I are new in amity ,
And will to-morrow midnight solemnly 
Dance in Duke Theseus' house triumphantly ,
And bless it to all fair prosperity .
There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be 
Wedded , with Theseus , all in jollity .


Fairy king , attend , and mark :
I do hear the morning lark .

Then , my queen , in silence sad ,
Trip we after the night's shade ;
We the globe can compass soon ,
Swifter than the wandering moon .

Come , my lord ; and in our flight 
Tell me how it came this night 
That I sleeping here was found 
With these mortals on the ground .


Go , one of you , find out the forester ;
For now our observation is perform'd ;
And since we have the vaward of the day ,
My love shall hear the music of my hounds .
Uncouple in the western valley ; let them go :
Dispatch , I say , and find the forester .
We will , fair queen , up to the mountain's top ,
And mark the musical confusion 
Of hounds and echo in conjunction .

I was with Hercules and Cadmus once ,
When in a wood of Crete they bay'd the bear 
With hounds of Sparta : never did I hear 
Such gallant chiding ; for , besides the groves ,
The skies , the fountains , every region near 
Seem'd all one mutual cry . I never heard 
So musical a discord , such sweet thunder .

My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind ,
So flew'd , so sanded ; and their heads are hung 
With ears that sweep away the morning dew ;
Crook-knee'd , and dew-lapp'd like Thessalian bulls ;
Slow in pursuit , but match'd in mouth like bells ,
Each under each . A cry more tuneable 
Was never holla'd to , nor cheer'd with horn ,
In Crete , in Sparta , nor in Thessaly :
Judge , when you hear . But , soft ! what nymphs are these ?

My lord , this is my daughter here asleep ;
And this , Lysander ; this Demetrius is ;
This Helena , old Nedar's Helena :
I wonder of their being here together .

No doubt they rose up early to observe 
The rite of May , and , hearing our intent ,
Came here in grace of our solemnity .
But speak , Egeus , is not this the day 
That Hermia should give answer of her choice ?

It is , my lord .

Go , bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns .


Good morrow , friends . Saint Valentine is past :

Begin these wood-birds but to couple now ?

Pardon , my lord .


I pray you all , stand up .
I know you two are rival enemies :
How comes this gentle concord in the world ,
That hatred is so far from jealousy ,
To sleep by hate , and fear no enmity ?

My lord , I shall reply amazedly ,
Half sleep , half waking : but as yet , I swear ,
I cannot truly say how I came here ;
But , as I think ,for truly would I speak ,
And now I do bethink me , so it is ,
I came with Hermia hither : our intent 
Was to be gone from Athens , where we might ,
Without the peril of the Athenian law 

Enough , enough , my lord ; you have enough :
I beg the law , the law , upon his head .
They would have stol'n away ; they would , Demetrius ,
Thereby to have defeated you and me ;
You of your wife , and me of my consent ,
Of my consent that she should be your wife .

My lord , fair Helen told me of their stealth ,
Of this their purpose hither , to this wood ;
And I in fury hither follow'd them ,
Fair Helena in fancy following me .
But , my good lord , I wot not by what power ,
But by some power it is ,my love to Hermia ,
Melted as doth the snow , seems to me now 
As the remembrance of an idle gaud 
Which in my childhood I did dote upon ;
And all the faith , the virtue of my heart ,
The object and the pleasure of mine eye ,
Is only Helena . To her , my lord ,
Was I betroth'd ere I saw Hermia :
But , like in sickness , did I loathe this food ;
But , as in health , come to my natural taste ,
Now do I wish it , love it , long for it ,
And will for evermore be true to it .

Fair lovers , you are fortunately met :
Of this discourse we more will hear anon .
Egeus , I will overbear your will ,
For in the temple , by and by , with us ,
These couples shall eternally be knit :
And , for the morning now is something worn ,
Our purpos'd hunting shall be set aside .
Away with us , to Athens : three and three ,
We'll hold a feast in great solemnity .
Come , Hippolyta .


These things seem small and undistinguishable ,
Like far-off mountains turned into clouds .

Methinks I see these things with parted eye ,
When everything seems double .

So methinks :
And I have found Demetrius , like a jewel ,
Mine own , and not mine own .

Are you sure 
That we are awake ? It seems to me 
That yet we sleep , we dream . Do you not think 
The duke was here , and bid us follow him ?

Yea ; and my father .

And Hippolyta .

And he did bid us follow to the temple .

Why then , we are awake . Let's follow him ;
And by the way let us recount our dreams .


When my cue comes , call me , and I will answer : my next is , 'Most fair Pyramus .' Heigh-ho ! Peter Quince ! Flute , the bellows-mender ! Snout , the tinker ! Starveling ! God's my life ! stolen hence , and left me asleep ! I have had a most rare vision . I have had a dream , past the wit of man to say what dream it was : man is but an ass , if he go about to expound this dream . Methought I was there is no man can tell what . Methought I was ,and methought I had ,but man is but a patched fool , if he will offer to say what methought I had . The eye of man hath not heard , the ear of man hath not seen , man's hand is not able to taste , his tongue to conceive , nor his heart to report , what my dream was . I will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of this dream : it shall be called Bottom's Dream , because it hath no bottom ; and I will sing it in the latter end of a play , before the duke : peradventure , to make it the more gracious , I shall sing it at her death .


Have you sent to Bottom's house ? is he come home yet ?

He cannot be heard of . Out of doubt he is transported .

If he come not , then the play is marred : it goes not forward , doth it ?

It is not possible : you have not a man in all Athens able to discharge Pyramus but he .

No ; he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in Athens .

Yea , and the best person too ; and he is a very paramour for a sweet voice .

You must say , 'paragon :' a paramour is , God bless us ! a thing of naught .


Masters , the duke is coming from the temple , and there is two or three lords and ladies more married : if our sport had gone forward , we had all been made men .

O sweet bully Bottom ! Thus hath he lost sixpence a day during his life ; he could not have 'scaped sixpence a day : an the duke had not given him sixpence a day for playing Pyramus , I'll be hanged ; he would have deserved it : sixpence a day in Pyramus , or nothing .


Where are these lads ? where are these hearts ?

Bottom ! O most courageous day ! O most happy hour !

Masters , I am to discourse wonders : but ask me not what ; for if I tell you , I am no true Athenian . I will tell you everything , right as it fell out .

Let us hear , sweet Bottom .

Not a word of me . All that I will tell you is , that the duke hath dined . Get your apparel together , good strings to your beards , new ribbons to your pumps ; meet presently at the palace ; every man look o'er his part ; for the short and the long is , our play is preferred . In any case , let Thisby have clean linen ; and let not him that plays the lion pare his nails , for they shall hang out for the lion's claws . And , most dear actors , eat no onions nor garlic , for we are to utter sweet breath , and I do not doubt but to hear them say , it is a sweet comedy . No more words : away ! go ; away .

'Tis strange , my Theseus , that these lovers speak of .

More strange than true . I never may believe 
These antique fables , nor these fairy toys .
Lovers and madmen have such seething brains ,
Such shaping fantasies , that apprehend 
More than cool reason ever comprehends .
The lunatic , the lover , and the poet ,
Are of imagination all compact :
One sees more devils than vast hell can hold ,
That is , the madman ; the lover , all as frantic ,
Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt :
The poet's eye , in a fine frenzy rolling ,
Doth glance from heaven to earth , from earth to heaven ;
And , as imagination bodies forth 
The forms of things unknown , the poet's pen 
Turns them to shapes , and gives to airy nothing 
A local habitation and a name .
Such tricks hath strong imagination ,
That , if it would but apprehend some joy ,
It comprehends some bringer of that joy ;
Or in the night , imagining some fear ,
How easy is a bush suppos'd a bear !

But all the story of the night told over ,
And all their minds transfigur'd so together ,
More witnesseth than fancy's images ,
And grows to something of great constancy ,
But , howsoever , strange and admirable .

Here come the lovers , full of joy and mirth .


Joy , gentle friends ! joy , and fresh days of love 

Accompany your hearts !

More than to us 
Wait in your royal walks , your board , your bed !

Come now ; what masques , what dances shall we have ,
To wear away this long age of three hours 
Between our after-supper and bed-time ?
Where is our usual manager of mirth ?
What revels are in hand ? Is there no play ,
To ease the anguish of a torturing hour ?
Call Philostrate .

Here , mighty Theseus .

Say , what abridgment have you for this evening ?
What masque ? what music ? How shall we beguile 
The lazy time , if not with some delight ?

There is a brief how many sports are ripe ;
Make choice of which your highness will see first .


The battle with the Centaurs , to be sung 
By an Athenian eunuch to the harp .
We'll none of that : that have I told my love ,
In glory of my kinsman Hercules .
The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals ,
Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage .
That is an old device ; and it was play'd 
When I from Thebes came last a conqueror .
The thrice three Muses mourning for the death 
Of Learning , late deceas'd in beggary .
That is some satire keen and critical ,
Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony .
A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus 
And his love Thisbe ; very tragical mirth .
Merry and tragical ! tedious and brief !
That is , hot ice and wonderous strange snow .
How shall we find the concord of this discord ?

A play there is , my lord , some ten words long ,
Which is as brief as I have known a play ;
But by ten words , my lord , it is too long ,
Which makes it tedious ; for in all the play 
There is not one word apt , one player fitted .
And tragical , my noble lord , it is ;
For Pyramus therein doth kill himself .
Which when I saw rehears'd , I must confess ,
Made mine eyes water ; but more merry tears 
The passion of loud laughter never shed .

What are they that do play it ?

Hard-handed men , that work in Athens here ,
Which never labour'd in their minds till now ,
And now have toil'd their unbreath'd memories 
With this same play , against your nuptial .

And we will hear it .

No , my noble lord ;
It is not for you : I have heard it over ,
And it is nothing , nothing in the world ;
Unless you can find sport in their intents ,
Extremely stretch'd and conn'd with cruel pain ,
To do you service .

I will hear that play ;
For never anything can be amiss ,
When simpleness and duty tender it .
Go , bring them in : and take your places , ladies .


I love not to see wretchedness o'ercharg'd ,
And duty in his service perishing .

Why , gentle sweet , you shall see no such thing .

He says they can do nothing in this kind .

The kinder we , to give them thanks for nothing .
Our sport shall be to take what they mistake :
And what poor duty cannot do , noble respect 
Takes it in might , not merit .
Where I have come , great clerks have purposed 
To greet me with premeditated welcomes ;
Where I have seen them shiver and look pale ,
Make periods in the midst of sentences ,
Throttle their practis'd accent in their fears ,
And , in conclusion , dumbly have broke off ,
Not paying me a welcome . Trust me , sweet ,
Out of this silence yet I pick'd a welcome ;
And in the modesty of fearful duty 
I read as much as from the rattling tongue 
Of saucy and audacious eloquence .
Love , therefore , and tongue-tied simplicity 
In least speak most , to my capacity .


So please your Grace , the Prologue is address'd .

Let him approach .


If we offend , it is with our good will .
That you should think , we come not to offend ,
But with good will . To show our simple skill ,
That is the true beginning of our end .
Consider then we come but in despite .
We do not come as minding to content you ,
Our true intent is . All for your delight ,
We are not here . That you should here repent you ,
The actors are at hand ; and , by their show ,
You shall know all that you are like to know .


This fellow doth not stand upon points .

He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt ; he knows not the stop . A good moral , my lord : it is not enough to speak , but to speak true .

Indeed he hath played on his prologue like a child on a recorder ; a sound , but not in government .

His speech was like a tangled chain ; nothing impaired , but all disordered . Who is next ?


Gentles , perchance you wonder at this show ;
But wonder on , till truth make all things plain .
This man is Pyramus , if you would know ;
This beauteous lady Thisby is , certain .
This man , with lime and rough-cast , doth present 
Wall , that vile Wall which did these lovers sunder ;
And through Wall's chink , poor souls , they are content 
To whisper , at the which let no man wonder .
This man , with lanthorn , dog , and bush of thorn ,
Presenteth Moonshine ; for , if you will know ,
By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn 
To meet at Ninus' tomb , there , there to woo .
This grisly beast , which Lion hight by name ,
The trusty Thisby , coming first by night ,
Did scare away , or rather did affright ;
And , as she fied , her mantle she did fall ,
Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain .
Anon comes Pyramus , sweet youth and tall ,
And finds his trusty Thisby's mantle slain :
Whereat , with blade , with bloody blameful blade ,
He bravely broach'd his boiling bloody breast ;
And Thisby , tarrying in mulberry shade ,
His dagger drew , and died . For all the rest ,
Let Lion , Moonshine , Wall , and lovers twain ,
At large discourse , while here they do remain .


I wonder , if the lion be to speak .

No wonder , my lord : one lion may , when many asses do .
Wall . In this same interlude it doth befall 
That I , one Snout by name , present a wall ;
And such a wall , as I would have you think ,
That had in it a crannied hole or chink ,
Through which the lovers , Pyramus and Thisby ,
Did whisper often very secretly .
This loam , this rough-cast , and this stone doth show 
That I am that same wall ; the truth is so ;
And this the cranny is , right and sinister ,
Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper .

Would you desire lime and hair to speak better ?

It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard discourse , my lord .

Pyramus draws near the wall : silence !


O grim-look'd night ! O night with hue so black !
O night , which ever art when day is not !
O night ! O night ! alack , alack , alack !
I fear my Thisby's promise is forgot .
And thou , O wall ! O sweet , O lovely wall !
That stand'st between her father's ground and mine ;
Thou wall , O wall ! O sweet , and lovely wall !
Show me thy chink to blink through with mine eyne .

Thanks , courteous wall : Jove shield thee well for this !
But what see I ? No Thisby do I see .
O wicked wall ! through whom I see no bliss ;
Curs'd be thy stones for thus deceiving me !

The wall , methinks , being sensible , should curse again .

No , in truth , sir , he should not . 'Deceiving me ,' is Thisby's cue : she is to enter now , and I am to spy her through the wall . You shall see , it will fall pat as I told you . Yonder she comes .


O wall ! full often hast thou heard my moans ,
For parting my fair Pyramus and me :
My cherry lips have often kiss'd thy stones ,
Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee .

I see a voice : now will I to the chink ,
To spy an I can hear my Thisby's face .
Thisby .

My love ! thou art my love , I think .

Think what thou wilt , I am thy lover's grace ;
And , like Limander , am I trusty still .

And I like Helen , till the Fates me kill .

Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true .

As Shafalus to Procrus , I to you .

O ! kiss me through the hole of this vile wall .

I kiss the wall's hole , not your lips at all 

Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meet me straightway ?

'Tide life , 'tide death , I come without delay .


Thus have I , Wall , my part discharged so ;
And , being done , thus Wall away doth go .


Now is the mural down between the two neighbours .

No remedy , my lord , when walls are so wilful to hear without warning .

This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard .

The best in this kind are but shadows , and the worst are no worse , if imagination amend them .

It must be your imagination then , and not theirs .

If we imagine no worse of them than they of themselves , they may pass for excellent men . Here come two noble beasts in , a man and a lion .


You , ladies , you , whose gentle hearts do fear 
The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor ,
May now perchance both quake and tremble here ,
When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar .
Then know that I , one Snug the joiner , am 
A lion-fell , nor else no lion's dam :
For , if I should as lion come in strife 
Into this place , 'twere pity on my life .

A very gentle beast , and of a good conscience .

The very best at a beast , my lord , that e'er I saw .

This lion is a very fox for his valour .

True ; and a goose for his discretion .

Not so , my lord ; for his valour cannot carry his discretion , and the fox carries the goose .

His discretion , I am sure , cannot carry his valour , for the goose carries not the fox . It is well : leave it to his discretion , and let us listen to the moon .

This lanthorn doth the horned moon present ;

He should have worn the horns on his head .

He is no crescent , and his horns are invisible within the circumference .

This lanthorn doth the horned moon present ;
Myself the man i' the moon do seem to be .

This is the greatest error of all the rest .
The man should be put into the lanthorn : how is it else the man i' the moon ?

He dares not come there for the candle ; for , you see , it is already in snuff .

I am aweary of this moon : would he would change !

It appears , by his small light of discretion , that he is in the wane ; but yet , in courtesy , in all reason , we must stay the time .

Proceed , Moon .

All that I have to say , is , to tell you that the lanthorn is the moon ; I , the man in the moon ; this thorn-bush , my thorn-bush ; and this dog , my dog .

Why , all these should be in the lanthorn ; for all these are in the moon . But , silence ! here comes Thisbe .


This is old Ninny's tomb . Where is my love ?

Oh .


Well roared , Lion .

Well run , Thisbe .

Well shone , Moon . Truly , the moon shines with a good grace .


Well moused , Lion .

And then came Pyramus .

And so the lion vanished .


Sweet moon , I thank thee for thy sunny beams ;
I thank thee , moon , for shining now so bright ,
For , by thy gracious , golden , glittering streams ,
I trust to taste of truest Thisby's sight .

But stay , O spite !
But mark , poor knight ,
What dreadful dole is here !
Eyes , do you see ?
How can it be ?
O dainty duck ! O dear !
Thy mantle good ,
What ! stain'd with blood !
Approach , ye Furies fell !
O Fates , come , come ,
Cut thread and thrum ;
Quail , crush , conclude , and quell !


This passion , and the death of a dear friend , would go near to make a man look sad .

Beshrew my heart , but I pity the man .

O ! wherefore , Nature , didst thou lions frame ?
Since lion vile hath here deflower'd my dear ?
Which is no , no which was the fairest dame 
That liv'd , that lov'd , that lik'd , that look'd with cheer .


Come tears , confound ;
Out , sword , and wound 
The pap of Pyramus :
Ay , that left pap ,
Where heart doth hop :
Thus die I , thus , thus , thus .

Now am I dead ,
Now am I fled ;
My soul is in the sky :
Tongue , lose thy light !
Moon , take thy flight !

Now die , die , die , die , die .

No die , but an ace , for him ; for he is but one .

Less than an ace , man , for he is dead ; he is nothing .

With the help of a surgeon , he might yet recover , and prove an ass .

How chance Moonshine is gone before Thisbe comes back and finds her lover ?

She will find him by starlight . Here she comes ; and her passion ends the play .


Methinks she should not use a long one for such a Pyramus : I hope she will be brief .

A mote will turn the balance , which Pyramus , which Thisbe , is the better : he for a man , God warrant us ; she for a woman , God bless us .

She hath spied him already with those sweet eyes .

And thus she moans , videlicet :


Asleep , my love ?
What , dead , my dove ?
O Pyramus , arise !
Speak , speak ! Quite dumb ?
Dead , dead ! A tomb 
Must cover thy sweet eyes .
These lily lips ,
This cherry nose ,
These yellow cowslip cheeks ,
Are gone , are gone :
Lovers , make moan !
His eyes were green as leeks .
O , Sisters Three ,
Come , come to me ,
With hands as pale as milk ;
Lay them in gore ,
Since you have shore 
With shears his thread of silk .
Tongue , not a word :
Come , trusty sword :
Come , blade , my breast imbrue :

And farewell , friends ;
Thus Thisby ends :
Adieu , adieu , adieu .

Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead .

Ay , and Wall too .

No , I assure you ; the wall is down that parted their fathers . Will it please you to see the epilogue , or to hear a Bergomask dance between two of our company ?

No epilogue , I pray you ; for your play needs no excuse . Never excuse ; for when the players are all dead , there need none to be blamed . Marry , if he that writ it had played Pyramus , and hanged himself in Thisbe's garter , it would have been a fine tragedy : and so it is , truly , and very notably discharged . But come , your Bergomask : let your epilogue alone .

The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve ;
Lovers , to bed ; 'tis almost fairy time .
I fear we shall out-sleep the coming morn ,
As much as we this night have overwatch'd .
This palpable-gross play hath well beguil'd 
The heavy gait of night . Sweet friends , to bed .
A fortnight hold we this solemnity ,
In nightly revels , and new jollity .

Now the hungry lion roars ,
And the wolf behowls the moon ;
Whilst the heavy ploughman snores ,
All with weary task fordone .
Now the wasted brands do glow ,
Whilst the screech-owl , screeching loud ,
Puts the wretch that lies in woe 
In remembrance of a shroud .
Now it is the time of night 
That the graves , all gaping wide ,
Every one lets forth his sprite ,
In the church-way paths to glide :
And we fairies , that do run 
By the triple Hecate's team ,
From the presence of the sun ,
Following darkness like a dream ,
Now are frolic ; not a mouse 
Shall disturb this hallow'd house :
I am sent with broom before ,
To sweep the dust behind the door .


Through the house give glimmering light 
By the dead and drowsy fire ;
Every elf and fairy sprite 
Hop as light as bird from brier ;
And this ditty after me 
Sing and dance it trippingly .

First , rehearse your song by rote ,
To each word a warbling note :
Hand in hand , with fairy grace ,
Will we sing , and bless this place .


Now , until the break of day ,
Through this house each fairy stray .
To the best bride-bed will we ,
Which by us shall blessed be ;
And the issue there create 
Ever shall be fortunate .
So shall all the couples three 
Ever true in loving be ;
And the blots of Nature's hand 
Shall not in their issue stand :
Never mole , hare-lip , nor scar ,
Nor mark prodigious , such as are 
Despised in nativity ,
Shall upon their children be .
With this field-dew consecrate ,
Every fairy take his gait ,
And each several chamber bless ,
Through this palace , with sweet peace ;
Ever shall in safety rest ,
And the owner of it blest .
Trip away ;
Make no stay ;
Meet me all by break of day .


If we shadows have offended ,
Think but this , and all is mended ,
That you have but slumber'd here 
While these visions did appear .
And this weak and idle theme ,
No more yielding but a dream ,
Gentles , do not reprehend :
If you pardon , we will mend .
And , as I'm an honest Puck ,
If we have unearned luck 
Now to 'scape the serpent's tongue ,
We will make amends ere long ;
Else the Puck a liar call :
So , good night unto you all .
Give me your hands , if we be friends ,
And Robin shall restore amends .

ALLS WELL THAT ENDS WELL

In delivering my son from me , I bury a second husband .

And I , in going , madam , weep o'er my father's death anew ; but I must attend his majesty's command , to whom I am now in ward , evermore in subjection .

You shall find of the king a husband , madam ; you , sir , a father . He that so generally is at all times good , must of necessity hold his virtue to you , whose worthiness would stir it up where it wanted rather than lack it where there is such abundance .

What hope is there of his majesty's amendment ?

He hath abandoned his physicians , madam ; under whose practices he hath persecuted time with hope , and finds no other advantage in the process but only the losing of hope by time .

This young gentlewoman had a father ,O , that 'had !' how sad a passage 'tis !whose skill was almost as great as his honesty ; had it stretched so far , would have made nature immortal , and death should have play for lack of work . Would , for the king's sake , he were living ! I think it would be the death of the king's disease .

How called you the man you speak of , madam ?

He was famous , sir , in his profession , and it was his great right to be so : Gerard de Narbon .

He was excellent indeed , madam : the king very lately spoke of him admiringly and mourningly . He was skilful enough to have lived still , if knowledge could be set up against mortality .

What is it , my good lord , the king languishes of ?

A fistula , my lord .

I heard not of it before .

I would it were not notorious . Was this gentlewoman the daughter of Gerard de Narbon ?

His sole child , my lord ; and bequeathed to my overlooking . I have those hopes of her good that her education promises : her dispositions she inherits , which makes fair gifts fairer ; for where an unclean mind carries virtuous qualities , there commendations go with pity ; they are virtues and traitors too : in her they are the better for their simpleness ; she derives her honesty and achieves her goodness .

Your commendations , madam , get from her tears .

'Tis the best brine a maiden can season her praise in . The remembrance of her father never approaches her heart but the tyranny of her sorrows takes all livelihood from her cheek . No more of this , Helena , go to , no more ; lest it be rather thought you affect a sorrow , than have it .

I do affect a sorrow indeed , but I have it too .

Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead , excessive grief the enemy to the living .

If the living be enemy to the grief , the excess makes it soon mortal .

Madam , I desire your holy wishes .

How understand we that ?

Be thou blest , Bertram ; and succeed thy father 
In manners , as in shape ! thy blood and virtue 
Contend for empire in thee ; and thy goodness 
Share with thy birthright ! Love all , trust a few ,
Do wrong to none : be able for thine enemy 
Rather in power than use , and keep thy friend 
Under thy own life's key : be check'd for silence ,
But never tax'd for speech . What heaven more will 
That thee may furnish , and my prayers pluck down ,
Fall on thy head ! Farewell , my lord ;
'Tis an unseason'd courtier ; good my lord ,
Advise him .

He cannot want the best 
That shall attend his love .

Heaven bless him ! Farewell , Bertram .


The best wishes that can be forged in your thoughts be servants to you ! Be comfortable to my mother , your mistress , and make much of her .

Farewell , pretty lady : you must hold the credit of your father .


O ! were that all . I think not on my father ;
And these great tears grace his remembrance more 
Than those I shed for him . What was he like ?
I have forgot him : my imagination 
Carries no favour in't but Bertram's .
I am undone : there is no living , none ,
If Bertram be away . It were all one 
That I should love a bright particular star 
And think to wed it , he is so above me :
In his bright radiance and collateral light 
Must I be comforted , not in his sphere .
The ambition in my love thus plagues itself :
The hind that would be mated by the lion 
Must die for love . 'Twas pretty , though a plague ,
To see him every hour ; to sit and draw 
His arched brows , his hawking eye , his curls ,
In our heart's table ; heart too capable 
Of every line and trick of his sweet favour :
But now he's gone , and my idolatrous fancy 
Must sanctify his reliques . Who comes here ?
One that goes with him : I love him for his sake ;
And yet I know him a notorious liar ,
Think him a great way fool , solely a coward ;
Yet these fix'd evils sit so fit in him ,
That they take place , when virtue's steely bones 
Look bleak in the cold wind : withal , full oft we see 
Cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly .


Save you , fair queen !

And you , monarch !

No .

And no .

Are you meditating on virginity ?

Ay . You have some stain of soldier in you ; let me ask you a question . Man is enemy to virginity ; how may we barricado it against him ?

Keep him out .

But he assails ; and our virginity , though valiant in the defence , yet is weak . Unfold to us some war-like resistance .

There is none : man , sitting down before you , will undermine you and blow you up .

Bless our poor virginity from underminers and blowers up ! Is there no military policy , how virgins might blow up men ?

Virginity being blown down , man will quicklier be blown up : marry in blowing him down again , with the breach yourselves made , you lose your city . It is not politic in the commonwealth of nature to preserve virginity . Loss of virginity is rational increase , and there was never virgin got till virginity was first lost . That you were made of is metal to make virgins . Virginity , by being once lost , may be ten times found : by being ever kept , it is ever lost .'Tis too cold a companion : away with't !

I will stand for't a little , though therefore I die a virgin .

There's little can be said in't ; 'tis against the rule of nature . To speak on the part of virginity is to accuse your mothers , which is most infallible disobedience . He that hangs himself is a virgin : virginity murders itself , and should be buried in highways , out of all sanctified limit , as a desperate offendress against nature . Virginity breeds mites , much like a cheese , consumes itself to the very paring , and so dies with feeding his own stomach . Besides , virginity is peevish , proud , idle , made of self-love , which is the most inhibited sin in the canon . Keep it not ; you cannot choose but lose by't ! Out with't ! within the year it will make itself two , which is a goodly increase , and the principal itself not much the worse . Away with't !

How might one do , sir , to lose it to her own liking ?

Let me see : marry , ill , to like him that ne'er it likes . 'Tis a commodity that will lose the gloss with lying ; the longer kept , the less worth : off with't , while 'tis vendible ; answer the time of request . Virginity , like an old courtier , wears her cap out of fashion ; richly suited , but unsuitable : just like the brooch and the toothpick , which wear not now . Your date is better in your pie and your porridge than in your cheek : and your virginity , your old virginity , is like one of our French withered pears ; it looks ill , it eats drily ; marry , 'tis a withered pear ; it was formerly better ; marry , yet 'tis a withered pear . Will you anything with it ?

Not my virginity yet .
There shall your master have a thousand loves ,
A mother , and a mistress , and a friend ,
A ph nix , captain , and an enemy ,
A guide , a goddess , and a sovereign ,
A counsellor , a traitress , and a dear ;
His humble ambition , proud humility ,
His jarring concord , and his discord dulcet ,
His faith , his sweet disaster ; with a world 
Of pretty , fond , adoptious christendoms ,
That blinking Cupid gossips . Now shall he 
I know not what he shall . God send him well !
The court's a learning-place , and he is one 

What one , i' faith ?

That I wish well . 'Tis pity 

What's pity ?

That wishing well had not a body in't ,
Which might be felt ; that we , the poorer born ,
Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes ,
Might with effects of them follow our friends ,
And show what we alone must think , which never 
Returns us thanks .


Monsieur Parolles , my lord calls for you .


Little Helen , farewell : if I can remember thee , I will think of thee at court .

Monsieur Parolles , you were born under a charitable star .

Under Mars , I .

I especially think , under Mars .

Why under Mars ?

The wars have so kept you under that you must needs be born under Mars .

When he was predominant .

When he was retrograde , I think rather .

Why think you so ?

You go so much backward when you fight .

That's for advantage .

So is running away , when fear proposes the safety : but the composition that your valour and fear makes in you is a virtue of a good wing , and I like the wear well .

I am so full of businesses I cannot answer thee acutely . I will return perfect courtier ; in the which , my instruction shall serve to naturalize thee , so thou wilt be capable of a courtier's counsel , and understand what advice shall thrust upon thee ; else thou diest in thine unthankfulness , and thine ignorance makes thee away : farewell . When thou hast leisure , say thy prayers ; when thou hast none , remember thy friends . Get thee a good husband , and use him as he uses thee : so , farewell .


Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie 
Which we ascribe to heaven : the fated sky 
Gives us free scope ; only doth backward pull 
Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull .
What power is it which mounts my love so high ;
That makes me see , and cannot feed mine eye ?
The mightiest space in fortune nature brings 
To join like likes , and kiss like native things .
Impossible be strange attempts to those 
That weigh their pains in sense , and do suppose 
What hath been cannot be : who ever strove 
To show her merit , that did miss her love ?
The king's disease ,my project may deceive me ,
But my intents are fix'd and will not leave me .


The Florentines and Senoys are by the ears ;
Have fought with equal fortune , and continue 
A braving war .

So 'tis reported , sir .

Nay , 'tis most credible : we here receive it 
A certainty , vouch'd from our cousin Austria ,
With caution that the Florentine will move us 
For speedy aid ; wherein our dearest friend 
Prejudicates the business , and would seem 
To have us make denial .

His love and wisdom ,
Approv'd so to your majesty , may plead 
For amplest credence .

He hath arm'd our answer ,
And Florence is denied before he comes :
Yet , for our gentlemen that mean to see 
The Tuscan service , freely have they leave 
To stand on either part .

It well may serve 
A nursery to our gentry , who are sick 
For breathing and exploit .

What's he comes here ?


It is the Count Rousillon , my good lord ,
Young Betram .

Youth , thou bear'st thy father's face ;
Frank nature , rather curious than in haste ,
Hath well compos'd thee . Thy father's moral parts 
Mayst thou inherit too ! Welcome to Paris .

My thanks and duty are your majesty's .

I would I had that corporal soundness now ,
As when thy father and myself in friendship 
First tried our soldiership ! He did look far 
Into the service of the time and was 
Discipled of the bravest : he lasted long ;
But on us both did haggish age steal on ,
And wore us out of act . It much repairs me 
To talk of your good father . In his youth 
He had the wit which I can well observe 
To-day in our young lords ; but they may jest 
Till their own scorn return to them unnoted 
Ere they can hide their levity in honour .
So like a courtier , contempt nor bitterness 
Were in his pride or sharpness ; if they were ,
His equal had awak'd them ; and his honour ,
Clock to itself , knew the true minute when 
Exception bid him speak , and at this time 
His tongue obey'd his hand : who were below him 
He us'd as creatures of another place ,
And bow'd his eminent top to their low ranks ,
Making them proud of his humility ,
In their poor praise he humbled . Such a man 
Might be a copy to these younger times ,
Which , follow'd well , would demonstrate them now 
But goers backward .

His good remembrance , sir ,
Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb ;
So in approof lives not his epitaph 
As in your royal speech .

Would I were with him ! He would always say ,
Methinks I hear him now : his plausive words 
He scatter'd not in ears , but grafted them ,
To grow there and to bear . 'Let me not live ,' 
Thus his good melancholy oft began ,
On the catastrophe and heel of pastime ,
When it was out ,'Let me not live ,' quoth he ,
'After my flame lacks oil , to be the snuff 
Of younger spirits , whose apprehensive senses 
All but new things disdain ; whose judgments are 
Mere fathers of their garments ; whose constancies 
Expire before their fashions .' This he wish'd :
I , after him , do after him wish too ,
Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home ,
I quickly were dissolved from my hive ,
To give some labourers room .

You are lov'd , sir ;
They that least lend it you shall lack you first .

I fill a place , I know't . How long is't , count ,
Since the physician at your father's died ?
He was much fam'd .

Some six months since , my lord .

If he were living , I would try him yet :
Lend me an arm : the rest have worn me out 
With several applications : nature and sickness 
Debate it at their leisure . Welcome , count ;
My son's no dearer .

Thank your majesty .


I will now hear : what say you of this gentlewoman ?

Madam , the care I have had to even your content , I wish might be found in the calendar of my past endeavours ; for then we wound our modesty and make foul the clearness of our deservings , when of ourselves we publish them .

What does this knave here ? Get you gone , sirrah : the complaints I have heard of you I do not all believe : 'tis my slowness that I do not ; for I know you lack not folly to commit them , and have ability enough to make such knaveries yours .

'Tis not unknown to you , madam , I am a poor fellow .

Well , sir .

No , madam , 'tis not so well that I am poor , though many of the rich are damned . But , if I may have your ladyship's good will to go to the world , Isbel the woman and I will do as we may .

Wilt thou needs be a beggar ?

I do beg your good will in this case .

In what case ?

In Isbel's case and mine own . Service is no heritage ; and I think I shall never have the blessing of God till I have issue o' my body , for they say barnes are blessings .

Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry .

My poor body , madam , requires it : I am driven on by the flesh ; and he must needs go that the devil drives .

Is this all your worship's reason ?

Faith , madam , I have other holy reasons , such as they are .

May the world know them ?

I have been , madam , a wicked creature , as you and all flesh and blood are ; and , indeed , I do marry that I may repent .

Thy marriage , sooner than thy wickedness .

I am out o' friends , madam ; and I hope to have friends for my wife's sake .

Such friends are thine enemies , knave .

You're shallow , madam , in great friends ; for the knaves come to do that for me which I am aweary of . He that ears my land spares my team , and gives me leave to in the crop : if I be his cuckold , he's my drudge . He that comforts my wife is the cherisher of my flesh and blood ; he that cherishes my flesh and blood loves my flesh and blood ; he that loves my flesh and blood is my friend : ergo , he that kisses my wife is my friend . If men could be contented to be what they are , there were no fear in marriage ; for young Charbon the puritan , and old Poysam the papist , howsome'er their hearts are severed in religion , their heads are both one ; they may joul horns together like any deer i' the herd .

Wilt thou ever be a foul-mouthed and calumnious knave ?

A prophet I , madam ; and I speak the truth the next way :

For I the ballad will repeat ,
Which men full true shall find ;
Your marriage comes by destiny ,
Your cuckoo sings by kind .


Get you gone , sir : I'll talk with you more anon .

May it please you , madam , that he bid Helen come to you : of her I am to speak .

Sirrah , tell my gentlewoman I would speak with her ; Helen I mean .


Was this fair face the cause , quoth she ,
Why the Grecians sacked Troy ?
Fond done , done fond ,
Was this King Priam's joy ?
With that she sighed as she stood ,
With that she sighed as she stood ,
And gave this sentence then ;
Among nine bad if one be good ,
Among nine bad if one be good ,
There's yet one good in ten .


What ! one good in ten ? you corrupt the song , sirrah .

One good woman in ten , madam ; which is a purifying o' the song . Would God would serve the world so all the year ! we'd find no fault with the tithe-woman if I were the parson . One in ten , quoth a' ! An we might have a good woman born but for every blazing star , or at an earthquake ,'twould mend the lottery well : a man may draw his heart out ere a' pluck one .

You'll be gone , sir knave , and do as I command you !

That man should be at woman's command , and yet no hurt done ! Though honesty be no puritan , yet it will do no hurt ; it will wear the surplice of humility over the black gown of a big heart . I am going , forsooth : the business is for Helen to come hither .


Well , now .

I know , madam , you love your gentlewoman entirely .

Faith , I do : her father bequeathed her to me ; and she herself , without other advantage , may lawfully make title to as much love as she finds : there is more owing her than is paid , and more shall be paid her than she'll demand .

Madam , I was very late more near her than I think she wished me : alone she was , and did communicate to herself her own words to her own ears ; she thought , I dare vow for her , they touched not any stranger sense . Her matter was , she loved your son : Fortune , she said , was no goddess , that had put such difference betwixt their two estates ; Love no god , that would not extend his might , only where qualities were level ; Dian no queen of virgins , that would suffer her poor knight surprised , without rescue in the first assault or ransom afterward . This she delivered in the most bitter touch of sorrow that e'er I heard virgin exclaim in ; which I held my duty speedily to acquaint you withal , sithence in the loss that may happen , it concerns you something to know it .

You have discharged this honestly : keep it to yourself . Many likelihoods informed me of this before , which hung so tottering in the balance that I could neither believe nor misdoubt . Pray you , leave me : stall this in your bosom ; and I thank you for your honest care . I will speak with you further anon .

Even so it was with me when I was young :
If ever we are nature's , these are ours ; this thorn 
Doth to our rose of youth rightly belong ;
Our blood to us , this to our blood is born :
It is the show and seal of nature's truth ,
Where love's strong passion is impress'd in youth :
By our remembrances of days foregone ,
Such were our faults ; or then we thought them none .

Her eye is sick on't : I observe her now .

What is your pleasure , madam ?

You know , Helen ,
I am a mother to you .

Mine honourable mistress .

Nay , a mother :
Why not a mother ? When I said , 'a mother ,' 
Methought you saw a serpent : what's in 'mother' 
That you start at it ? I say , I am your mother ;
And put you in the catalogue of those 
That were enwombed mine : 'tis often seen 
Adoption strives with nature , and choice breeds 
A native slip to us from foreign seeds ;
You ne'er oppress'd me with a mother's groan ,
Yet I express to you a mother's care .
God's mercy , maiden ! does it curd thy blood 
To say I am thy mother ? What's the matter ,
That this distemper'd messenger of wet ,
The many-colour'd Iris , rounds thine eye ?
Why ? that you are my daughter ?

That I am not .

I say , I am your mother .

Pardon , madam ;
The Count Rousillon cannot be my brother :
I am from humble , he from honour'd name ;
No note upon my parents , his all noble :
My master , my dear lord he is ; and I 
His servant live , and will his vassal die .
He must not be my brother .

Nor I your mother ?

You are my mother , madam : would you were ,
So that my lord your son were not my brother ,
Indeed my mother ! or were you both our mothers ,
I care no more for than I do for heaven ,
So I were not his sister . Can't no other ,
But , I your daughter , he must be my brother ?

Yes , Helen , you might be my daughter-in-law :
God shield you mean it not ! daughter and mother 
So strive upon your pulse . What , pale again ?
My fear hath catch'd your fondness : now I see 
The mystery of your loneliness , and find 
Your salt tears' head : now to all sense 'tis gross 
You love my son : invention is asham'd ,
Against the proclamation of thy passion ,
To say thou dost not : therefore tell me true ;
But tell me then , 'tis so ; for , look , thy cheeks 
Confess it , th' one to th' other ; and thine eyes 
See it so grossly shown in thy behaviours 
That in their kind they speak it : only sin 
And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue ,
That truth should be suspected . Speak , is't so ?
If it be so , you have wound a goodly clew ;
If it be not , forswear't : howe'er , I charge thee ,
As heaven shall work in me for thine avail ,
To tell me truly .

Good madam , pardon me !

Do you love my son ?

Your pardon , noble mistress !

Love you my son ?

Do not you love him , madam ?

Go not about ; my love hath in't a bond 
Whereof the world takes note : come , come , disclose 
The state of your affection , for your passions 
Have to the full appeach'd .

Then , I confess ,
Here on my knee , before high heaven and you 
That before you , and next unto high heaven ,
I love your son .
My friends were poor , but honest ; so's my love :
Be not offended , for it hurts not him 
That he is lov'd of me : I follow him not 
By any token of presumptuous suit ;
Nor would I have him till I do deserve him ;
Yet never know how that desert should be .
I know I love in vain , strive against hope ;
Yet , in this captious and intenible sieve 
I still pour in the waters of my love ,
And lack not to lose still . Thus , Indian-like ,
Religious in mine error , I adore 
The sun , that looks upon his worshipper ,
But knows of him no more . My dearest madam ,
Let not your hate encounter with my love 
For loving where you do : but , if yourself ,
Whose aged honour cites a virtuous youth ,
Did ever in so true a flame of liking 
Wish chastely and love dearly , that your Dian 
Was both herself and Love ; O ! then , give pity 
To her , whose state is such that cannot choose 
But lend and give where she is sure to lose ;
That seeks not to find that her search implies ,
But , riddle-like , lives sweetly where she dies .

Had you not lately an intent , speak truly ,
To go to Paris ?

Madam , I had .

Wherefore ? tell true .

I will tell truth ; by grace itself I swear .
You know my father left me some prescriptions 
Of rare and prov'd effects , such as his reading 
And manifest experience had collected 
For general sovereignty ; and that he will'd me 
In heedfull'st reservation to bestow them ,
As notes whose faculties inclusive were 
More than they were in note . Amongst the rest ,
There is a remedy , approv'd , set down 
To cure the desperate languishings whereof 
The king is render'd lost .

This was your motive 
For Paris , was it ? speak .

My lord your son made me to think of this ;
Else Paris , and the medicine , and the king ,
Had from the conversation of my thoughts 
Haply been absent then .

But think you , Helen ,
If you should tender your supposed aid ,
He would receive it ? He and his physicians 
Are of a mind ; he , that they cannot help him ,
They , that they cannot help . How shall they credit 
A poor unlearned virgin , when the schools ,
Embowell'd of their doctrine , have left off 
The danger to itself ?

There's something in't ,
More than my father's skill , which was the great'st 
Of his profession , that his good receipt 
Shall for my legacy be sanctified 
By the luckiest stars in heaven : and , would your honour 
But give me leave to try success , I'd venture 
The well-lost life of mine on his Grace's cure ,
By such a day , and hour .

Dost thou believe't ?

Ay , madam , knowingly .

Why , Helen , thou shalt have my leave and love ,
Means , and attendants , and my loving greetings 
To those of mine in court . I'll stay at home 
And pray God's blessing into thy attempt .
Be gone to-morrow ; and be sure of this ,
What I can help thee to thou shalt not miss .


Farewell , young lords : these war-like principles 
Do not throw from you : and you , my lords , farewell :
Share the advice betwixt you ; if both gain , all 
The gift doth stretch itself as 'tis receiv'd ,
And is enough for both .

'Tis our hope , sir ,
After well enter'd soldiers , to return 
And find your Grace in health .

No , no , it cannot be ; and yet my heart 
Will not confess he owes the malady 
That doth my life besiege . Farewell , young lords ;
Whether I live or die , be you the sons 
Of worthy Frenchmen : let higher Italy 
Those bated that inherit but the fall 
Of the last monarchy see that you come 
Not to woo honour , but to wed it ; when 
The bravest questant shrinks , find what you seek 
That fame may cry you loud : I say , farewell .

Health , at your bidding , serve your majesty !

Those girls of Italy , take heed of them :
They say , our French lack language to deny 
If they demand : beware of being captives ,
Before you serve .

Our hearts receive your warnings .

Farewell . Come hither to me .


O my sweet lord , that you will stay behind us !

'Tis not his fault , the spark .

O ! 'tis brave wars .

Most admirable : I have seen those wars .

I am commanded here , and kept a coil with 
'Too young ,' and 'the next year ,' and ''tis too early .' 

An thy mind stand to't , boy , steal away bravely .

I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock ,
Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry ,
Till honour be bought up and no sword worn 
But one to dance with ! By heaven ! I'll steal away .

There's honour in the theft .

Commit it , count .

I am your accessary ; and so farewell .

I grow to you , and our parting is a tortured body .

Farewell , captain .

Sweet Monsieur Parolles !

Noble heroes , my sword and yours are kin . Good sparks and lustrous , a word , good metals : you shall find in the regiment of the Spinii , one Captain Spurio , with his cicatrice , an emblem of war , here on his sinister cheek : it was this very sword entrenched it : say to him , I live , and observe his reports for me 

We shall , noble captain .


Mars dote on you for his novices ! What will ye do ?

Stay ; the king .


Use a more spacious ceremony to the noble lords ; you have restrained yourself within the list of too cold an adieu : be more expressive to them ; for they wear themselves in the cap of the time , there do muster true gait , eat , speak , and move under the influence of the most received star ; and though the devil lead the measure , such are to be followed . After them , and take a more dilated farewell .

And I will do so .

Worthy fellows ; and like to prove most sinewy swordmen .

Pardon , my lord , for me and for my tidings .

I'll fee thee to stand up .

Then here's a man stands that has brought his pardon .
I would you had kneel'd , my lord , to ask me mercy ,
And that at my bidding you could so stand up .

I would I had ; so I had broke thy pate ,
And ask'd thee mercy for't .

Good faith , across : but , my good lord , 'tis thus ;
Will you be cur'd of your infirmity ?

No .

O ! will you eat no grapes , my royal fox ?
Yes , but you will my noble grapes an if 
My royal fox could reach them . I have seen a medicine 
That's able to breathe life into a stone ,
Quicken a rock , and make you dance canary 
With spritely fire and motion ; whose simple touch 
Is powerful to araise King Pepin , nay ,
To give great Charlemain a pen in's hand 
And write to her a love-line .

What 'her' is this ?

Why , Doctor She . My lord , there's one arriv'd 
If you will see her : now , by my faith and honour ,
If seriously I may convey my thoughts 
In this my light deliverance , I have spoke 
With one , that in her sex , her years , profession ,
Wisdom , and constancy , hath amaz'd me more 
Than I dare blame my weakness . Will you see her ,
For that is her demand , and know her business ?
That done , laugh well at me .

Now , good Lafeu ,
Bring in the admiration , that we with thee 
May spend our wonder too , or take off thine 
By wond'ring how thou took'st it .

Nay , I'll fit you ,
And not be all day neither .


Thus he his special nothing ever prologues .


Nay , come your ways .

This haste hath wings indeed .

Nay , come your ways ;
This is his majesty , say your mind to him :
A traitor you do look like ; but such traitors 
His majesty seldom fears : I am Cressid's uncle ,
That dare leave two together . Fare you well .


Now , fair one , does your business follow us ?

Ay , my good lord .
Gerard de Narbon was my father ;
In what he did profess well found .

I knew him .

The rather will I spare my praises towards him ;
Knowing him is enough . On's bed of death 
Many receipts he gave me ; chiefly one ,
Which , as the dearest issue of his practice ,
And of his old experience the only darling ,
He bade me store up as a triple eye ,
Safer than mine own two , more dear . I have so ;
And , hearing your high majesty is touch'd 
With that malignant cause wherein the honour 
Of my dear father's gift stands chief in power ,
I come to tender it and my appliance ,
With all bound humbleness .

We thank you , maiden ;
But may not be so credulous of cure ,
When our most learned doctors leave us , and 
The congregated college have concluded 
That labouring art can never ransom nature 
From her inaidable estate ; I say we must not 
So stain our judgment , or corrupt our hope ,
To prostitute our past-cure malady 
To empirics , or to dissever so 
Our great self and our credit , to esteem 
A senseless help when help past sense we deem .

My duty then , shall pay me for my pains :
I will no more enforce mine office on you ;
Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts 
A modest one , to bear me back again .

I cannot give thee less , to be call'd grateful .
Thou thought'st to help me , and such thanks I give 
As one near death to those that wish him live ;
But what at full I know , thou know'st no part ,
I knowing all my peril , thou no art .

What I can do can do no hurt to try ,
Since you set up your rest 'gainst remedy .
He that of greatest works is finisher 
Oft does them by the weakest minister :
So holy writ in babes hath judgment shown ,
When judges have been babes ; great floods have flown 
From simple sources ; and great seas have dried 
When miracles have by the greatest been denied .
Oft expectation fails , and most oft there 
Where most it promises ; and oft it hits 
Where hope is coldest and despair most fits .

I must not hear thee : fare thee well , kind maid .
Thy pains , not us'd , must by thyself be paid :
Proffers not took reap thanks for their reward .

Inspired merit so by breath is barr'd .
It is not so with Him that all things knows ,
As 'tis with us that square our guess by shows ;
But most it is presumption in us when 
The help of heaven we count the act of men .
Dear sir , to my endeavours give consent ;
Of heaven , not me , make an experiment .
I am not an impostor that proclaim 
Myself against the level of mine aim ;
But know I think , and think I know most sure ,
My art is not past power nor you past cure .

Art thou so confident ? Within what space 
Hop'st thou my cure ?

The great'st grace lending grace ,
Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring 
Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring ,
Ere twice in murk and occidental damp 
Moist Hesperus hath quench'd his sleepy lamp ,
Or four and twenty times the pilot's glass 
Hath told the thievish minutes how they pass ,
What is infirm from your sound parts shall fly ,
Health shall live free , and sickness freely die .

Upon thy certainty and confidence 
What dar'st thou venture ?

Tax of impudence ,
A strumpet's boldness , a divulged shame ,
Traduc'd by odious ballads : my maiden's name 
Sear'd otherwise ; nay worse if worse extended 
With vilest torture let my life be ended .

Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak ,
His powerful sound within an organ weak ;
And what impossibility would slay 
In common sense , sense saves another way .
Thy life is dear ; for all that life can rate 
Worth name of life in thee hath estimate ;
Youth , beauty , wisdom , courage , virtue , all 
That happiness and prime can happy call :
Thou this to hazard needs must intimate 
Skill infinite or monstrous desperate .
Sweet practiser , thy physic I will try ,
That ministers thine own death if I die .

If I break time , or flinch in property 
Of what I spoke , unpitied let me die ,
And well deserv'd . Not helping , death's my fee ;
But , if I help , what do you promise me ?

Make thy demand .

But will you make it even ?

Ay , by my sceptre , and my hopes of heaven .

Then shalt thou give me with thy kingly hand 
What husband in thy power I will command :
Exempted be from me the arrogance 
To choose from forth the royal blood of France ,
My low and humble name to propagate 
With any branch or image of thy state ;
But such a one , thy vassal , whom I know 
Is free for me to ask , thee to bestow .

Here is my hand ; the premises observ'd ,
Thy will by my performance shall be serv'd :
So make the choice of thy own time , for I ,
Thy resolv'd patient , on thee still rely .
More should I question thee , and more I must ,
Though more to know could not be more to trust ,
From whence thou cam'st , how tended on ; but rest 
Unquestion'd welcome and undoubted blest .
Give me some help here , ho ! If thou proceed 
As high as word , my deed shall match thy deed .


Come on , sir ; I shall now put you to the height of your breeding .

I will show myself highly fed and lowly taught . I know my business is but to the court .

To the court ! why what place make you special , when you put off that with such contempt ? 'But to the court !' 

Truly , madam , if God have lent a man any manners , he may easily put it off at court : he that cannot make a leg , put off's cap , kiss his hand , and say nothing , has neither leg , hands , lip , nor cap ; and indeed such a fellow , to say precisely , were not for the court . But , for me , I have an answer will serve all men .

Marry , that's a bountiful answer that fits all questions .

It is like a barber's chair that fits all buttocks ; the pin-buttock , the quatch-buttock , the brawn-buttock , or any buttock .

Will your answer serve fit to all questions ?

As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney , as your French crown for your taffeta punk , as Tib's rush for Tom's forefinger , as a pancake for Shrove-Tuesday , a morris for Mayday , as the nail to his hole , the cuckold to his horn , as a scolding quean to a wrangling knave , as the nun's lip to the friar's mouth ; nay , as the pudding to his skin .

Have you , I say , an answer of such fitness for all questions ?

From below your duke to beneath your constable , it will fit any question .

It must be an answer of most monstrous size that must fit all demands .

But a trifle neither , in good faith , if the learned should speak truth of it . Here it is , and all that belongs to't : ask me if I am a courtier ; it shall do you no harm to learn .

To be young again , if we could . I will be a fool in question , hoping to be the wiser by your answer . I pray you , sir , are you a courtier ?

O Lord , sir ! there's a simple putting off . More , more , a hundred of them .

Sir , I am a poor friend of yours , that loves you .

O Lord , sir ! Thick , thick , spare not me .

I think , sir , you can eat none of this homely meat .

O Lord , sir ! Nay , put me to't , I warrant you .

You were lately whipped , sir , as I think .

O Lord , sir ! Spare not me .

Do you cry , 'O Lord , sir !' at your whipping , and 'Spare not me ?' Indeed your 'O Lord , sir !' is very sequent to your whipping : you would answer very well to a whipping , if you were but bound to't .

I ne'er had worse luck in my life in my 'O Lord , sir !' I see things may serve long , but not serve ever .

I play the noble housewife with the time ,
To entertain't so merrily with a fool .

O Lord , sir ! why , there't serves well again .

An end , sir : to your business . Give Helen this ,
And urge her to a present answer back :
Commend me to my kinsmen and my son .
This is not much .

Not much commendation to them .

Not much employment for you : you understand me ?

Most fruitfully : I am there before my legs .

Haste you again .


They say miracles are past ; and we have our philosophical persons , to make modern and familiar , things supernatural and causeless . Hence is it that we make trifles of terrors , ensconcing ourselves into seeming knowledge , when we should submit ourselves to an unknown fear .

Why , 'tis the rarest argument of wonder that hath shot out in our latter times .

And so 'tis .

To be relinquished of the artists ,

So I say .

Both of Galen and Paracelsus .

So I say .

Of all the learned and authentic fellows ,

Right ; so I say .

That gave him out incurable ,

Why , there 'tis ; so say I too .

Not to be helped ,

Right ; as 'twere , a man assured of a 

Uncertain life , and sure death .

Just , you say well : so would I have said .

I may truly say it is a novelty to the world .

It is , indeed : if you will have it in showing , you shall read it in what do you call there 

A showing of a heavenly effect in an earthly actor .

That's it I would have said ; the very same .

Why , your dolphin is not lustier : 'fore me , I speak in respect 

Nay , 'tis strange , 'tis very strange , that is the brief and the tedious of it ; and he is of a most facinorous spirit , that will not acknowledge it to be the 

Very hand of heaven 

Ay , so I say .

In a most weak and debile minister , great power , great transcendence : which should , indeed , give us a further use to be made than alone the recovery of the king , as to be generally thankful .

I would have said it ; you say well . Here comes the king .


Lustig , as the Dutchman says : I'll like a maid the better , whilst I have a tooth in my head . Why , he's able to lead her a coranto .

Mort du vinaigre ! Is not this Helen ?

'Fore God , I think so .

Go , call before me all the lords in court .

Sit , my preserver , by thy patient's side :
And with this healthful hand , whose banish'd sense 
Thou hast repeal'd , a second time receive 
The confirmation of my promised gift ,
Which but attends thy naming .


Fair maid , send forth thine eye : this youthful parcel 
Of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing ,
O'er whom both sov'reign power and father's voice 
I have to use : thy frank election make ;

Thou hast power to choose , and they none to forsake .

To each of you one fair and virtuous mistress 
Fall , when Love please ! marry , to each , but one .

I'd give bay Curtal , and his furniture ,
My mouth no more were broken than these boys' 
And writ as little beard .

Peruse them well :
Not one of those but had a noble father .

Gentlemen ,
Heaven hath through me restor'd the king to health .

We understand it , and thank heaven for you .

I am a simple maid ; and therein wealthiest 
That I protest I simply am a maid .
Please it your majesty , I have done already :
The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me ,
'We blush , that thou shouldst choose ; but , be refus'd ,
Let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever ;
We'll ne'er come there again .' 

Make choice ; and see ,
Who shuns thy love , shuns all his love in me .

Now , Dian , from thy altar do I fly ,
And to imperial Love , that god most high ,
Do my sighs stream . Sir , will you hear my suit ?

And grant it .

Thanks , sir ; all the rest is mute .

I had rather be in this choice than throw ames-ace for my life .

The honour , sir , that flames in your fair eyes ,
Before I speak , too threateningly replies :
Love make your fortunes twenty times above 
Her that so wishes , and her humble love !

No better , if you please .

My wish receive ,
Which great Love grant ! and so I take my leave .

Do all they deny her ? An they were sons of mine , I'd have them whipp'd or I would send them to the Turk to make eunuchs of .

Be not afraid that I your hand should take ;
I'll never do you wrong for your own sake :
Blessing upon your vows ! and in your bed 
Find fairer fortune , if you ever wed !

These boys are boys of ice , they'll none have her : sure , they are bastards to the English ; the French ne'er got 'em .

You are too young , too happy , and too good ,
To make yourself a son out of my blood .

Fair one , I think not so .

There's one grape yet . I am sure thy father drunk wine . But if thou be'st not an ass , I am a youth of fourteen : I have known thee already .

I dare not say I take you ; but I give 
Me and my service , ever whilst I live ,
Into your guiding power . This is the man .

Why then , young Bertram , take her ; she's thy wife .

My wife , my liege ! I shall beseech your highness 
In such a business give me leave to use 
The help of mine own eyes .

Know'st thou not , Bertram ,
What she has done for me ?

Yes , my good lord ;
But never hope to know why I should marry her .

Thou know'st she has rais'd me from my sickly bed .

But follows it , my lord , to bring me down 
Must answer for your raising ? I know her well :
She had her breeding at my father's charge .
A poor physician's daughter my wife ! Disdain 
Rather corrupt me ever !

'Tis only title thou disdain'st in her , the which 
I can build up . Strange is it that our bloods ,
Of colour , weight , and heat , pour'd all together ,
Would quite confound distinction , yet stand off 
In differences so mighty . If she be 
All that is virtuous , save what thou dislik'st ,
A poor physician's daughter , thou dislik'st 
Of virtue for the name ; but do not so :
From lowest place when virtuous things proceed ,
The place is dignified by the doer's deed :
Where great additions swell's , and virtue none ,
It is a dropsied honour . Good alone 
Is good without a name : vileness is so :
The property by what it is should go ,
Not by the title . She is young , wise , fair ;
In these to nature she's immediate heir ,
And these breed honour : that is honour's scorn 
Which challenges itself as honour's born ,
And is not like the sire : honours thrive 
When rather from our acts we them derive 
Than our foregoers . The mere word's a slave ,
Debosh'd on every tomb , on every grave 
A lying trophy , and as oft is dumb 
Where dust and damn'd oblivion is the tomb 
Of honour'd bones indeed . What should be said ?
If thou canst like this creature as a maid ,
I can create the rest : virtue and she 
Is her own dower ; honour and wealth from me .

I cannot love her , nor will strive to do't .

Thou wrong'st thyself if thou shouldst strive to choose .

That you are well restor'd , my lord , I'm glad :
Let the rest go .

My honour's at the stake , which to defeat 
I must produce my power . Here , take her hand ,
Proud scornful boy , unworthy this good gift ,
That dost in vile misprision shackle up 
My love and her desert ; thou canst not dream 
We , poising us in her defective scale ,
Shall weigh thee to the beam ; that wilt not know ,
It is in us to plant thine honour where 
We please to have it grow . Check thy contempt :
Obey our will , which travails in thy good :
Believe not thy disdain , but presently 
Do thine own fortunes that obedient right 
Which both thy duty owes and our power claims ;
Or I will throw thee from my care for ever 
Into the staggers and the careless lapse 
Of youth and ignorance ; both my revenge and hate 
Loosing upon thee , in the name of justice ,
Without all terms of pity . Speak ; thine answer .

Pardon , my gracious lord ; for I submit 
My fancy to your eyes . When I consider 
What great creation and what dole of honour 
Flies where you bid it , I find that she , which late 
Was in my nobler thoughts most base , is now 
The praised of the king ; who , so ennobled ,
Is , as 'twere , born so .

Take her by the hand ,
And tell her she is thine : to whom I promise 
A counterpoise , if not to thy estate 
A balance more replete .

I take her hand .

Good fortune and the favour of the king 
Smile upon this contract ; whose ceremony 
Shall seem expedient on the now-born brief ,
And be perform'd to-night : the solemn feast 
Shall more attend upon the coming space ,
Expecting absent friends . As thou lov'st her ,
Thy love's to me religious ; else , does err .


Do you hear , monsieur ? a word with you .

Your pleasure , sir ?

Your lord and master did well to make his recantation .

Recantation ! My lord ! my master !

Ay ; is it not a language I speak ?

A most harsh one , and not to be understood without bloody succeeding . My master !

Are you companion to the Count Rousillon ?

To any count ; to all counts ; to what is man .

To what is count's man : count's master is of another style .

You are too old , sir ; let it satisfy you , you are too old .

I must tell thee , sirrah , I write man ; to which title age cannot bring thee .

What I dare too well do , I dare not do .

I did think thee , for two ordinaries , to be a pretty wise fellow : thou didst make tolerable vent of thy travel ; it might pass : yet the scarfs and the bannerets about thee did manifoldly dissuade me from believing thee a vessel of too great a burden . I have now found thee ; when I lose thee again , I care not ; yet art thou good for nothing but taking up , and that thou'rt scarce worth .

Hadst thou not the privilege of antiquity upon thee ,

Do not plunge thyself too far in anger , lest thou hasten thy trial ; which if Lord have mercy on thee for a hen ! So , my good window of lattice , fare thee well : thy casement I need not open , for I look through thee . Give me thy hand .

My lord , you give me most egregious indignity .

Ay , with all my heart ; and thou art worthy of it .

I have not , my lord , deserved it .

Yes , good faith , every dram of it ; and I will not bate thee a scruple .

Well , I shall be wiser .

E'en as soon as thou canst , for thou hast to pull at a smack o' the contrary . If ever thou be'st bound in thy scarf and beaten , thou shalt find what it is to be proud of thy bondage . I have a desire to hold my acquaintance with thee , or rather my knowledge , that I may say in the default , he is a man I know .

My lord , you do me most insupportable vexation .

I would it were hell-pains for thy sake , and my poor doing eternal : for doing I am past ; as I will by thee , in what motion age will give me leave .


Well , thou hast a son shall take this disgrace off me ; scurvy , old , filthy , scurvy lord ! Well , I must be patient ; there is no fettering of authority . I'll beat him , by my life , if I can meet him with any convenience , an he were double and double a lord . I'll have no more pity of his age than I would have of I'll beat him , an if I could but meet him again !


Sirrah , your lord and master's married ; there's news for you : you have a new mistress .

I most unfeignedly beseech your lordship to make some reservation of your wrongs : he is my good lord : whom I serve above is my master .

Who ? God ?

Ay , sir .

The devil it is that's thy master . Why dost thou garter up thy arms o' this fashion ? dost make hose of thy sleeves ? do other servants so ? Thou wert best set thy lower part where thy nose stands . By mine honour , if I were but two hours younger , I'd beat thee : methinks thou art a general offence , and every man should beat thee : I think thou wast created for men to breathe themselves upon thee .

This is hard and undeserved measure , my lord .

Go to , sir ; you were beaten in Italy for picking a kernel out of a pomegranate ; you are a vagabond and no true traveller : you are more saucy with lords and honourable personages than the heraldry of your birth and virtue gives you commission . You are not worth another word , else I'd call you knave . I leave you .


Good , very good ; it is so then : good , very good . Let it be concealed awhile .


Undone , and forfeited to cares for ever !

What is the matter , sweet heart ?

Although before the solemn priest I have sworn ,
I will not bed her .

What , what , sweet heart ?

O my Parolles , they have married me !
I'll to the Tuscan wars , and never bed her .

France is a dog-hole , and it no more merits 
The tread of a man's foot . To the wars !

There's letters from my mother : what the import is 
I know not yet .

Ay , that would be known . To the wars , my boy ! to the wars !
He wears his honour in a box , unseen ,
That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home ,
Spending his manly marrow in her arms ,
Which should sustain the bound and high curvet 
Of Mars's fiery steed . To other regions !
France is a stable ; we that dwell in't jades ;
Therefore , to the war !

It shall be so : I'll send her to my house ,
Acquaint my mother with my hate to her ,
And wherefore I am fled ; write to the king 
That which I durst not speak : his present gift 
Shall furnish me to those Italian fields ,
Where noble fellows strike . War is no strife 
To the dark house and the detested wife .

Will this capriccio hold in thee ? art sure ?

Go with me to my chamber , and advise me .
I'll send her straight away : to-morrow 
I'll to the wars , she to her single sorrow .

Why , these balls bound ; there's noise in it . 'Tis hard :
A young man married is a man that's marr'd :
Therefore away , and leave her bravely ; go :
The king has done you wrong : but , hush ! 'tis so .


My mother greets me kindly : is she well ?

She is not well ; but yet she has her health ; she's very merry ; but yet she is not well : but thanks be given , she's very well , and wants nothing i' the world ; but yet she is not well .

If she be very well , what does she ail that she's not very well ?

Truly , she's very well indeed , but for two things .

What two things ?

One , that she's not in heaven , whither 
God send her quickly ! the other , that she's in earth , from whence God send her quickly !


Bless you , my fortunate lady !

I hope , sir , I have your good will to have mine own good fortunes .

You had my prayers to lead them on ; and to keep them on , have them still . O ! my knave , how does my old lady ?

So that you had her wrinkles , and I her money , I would she did as you say .

Why , I say nothing .

Marry , you are the wiser man ; for many a man's tongue shakes out his master's undoing . To say nothing , to do nothing , to know nothing , and to have nothing , is to be a great part of your title ; which is within a very little of nothing .

Away ! thou'rt a knave .

You should have said , sir , before a knave thou'rt a knave ; that is , before me thou'rt a knave : this had been truth , sir .

Go to , thou art a witty fool ; I have found thee .

Did you find me in yourself , sir ? or were you taught to find me ? The search , sir , was profitable ; and much fool may you find in you , even to the world's pleasure and the increase of laughter .

A good knave , i' faith , and well fed .
Madam , my lord will go away to-night ;
A very serious business calls on him .
The great prerogative and rite of love ,
Which , as your due , time claims , he does acknowledge ,
But puts it off to a compell'd restraint ;
Whose want , and whose delay , is strew'd with sweets ,
Which they distil now in the curbed time ,
To make the coming hour o'erflow with joy ,
And pleasure drown the brim .

What's his will else ?

That you will take your instant leave o' the king ,
And make this haste as your own good proceeding ,
Strengthen'd with what apology you think 
May make it probable need .

What more commands he ?

That , having this obtain'd , you presently 
Attend his further pleasure .

In everything I wait upon his will .

I shall report it so .

I pray you . Come , sirrah .


But I hope your lordship thinks not him a soldier .

Yes , my lord , and of very valiant approof .

You have it from his own deliverance .

And by other warranted testimony .

Then my dial goes not true : I took this lark for a bunting .

I do assure you , my lord , he is very great in knowledge , and accordingly valiant .

I have then sinned against his experience and transgressed against his valour ; and my state that way is dangerous , since I cannot yet find in my heart to repent . Here he comes ; I pray you , make us friends ; I will pursue the amity .


These things shall be done , sir .

Pray you , sir , who's his tailor ?

Sir ?

O ! I know him well . Ay , sir ; he , sir , is a good workman , a very good tailor .

Is she gone to the king ?

She is .

Will she away to-night ?

As you'll have her .

I have writ my letters , casketed my treasure ,
Given orders for our horses ; and to-night ,
When I should take possession of the bride ,
End ere I do begin .

A good traveller is something at the latter end of a dinner ; but one that lies three thirds , and uses a known truth to pass a thousand nothings with , should be once heard and thrice beaten . God save you , captain .

Is there any unkindness between my lord and you , monsieur ?

I know not how I have deserved to run into my lord's displeasure .

You have made shift to run into't , boots and spurs and all , like him that leaped into the custard ; and out of it you'll run again , rather than suffer question for your residence .

It may be you have mistaken him , my lord .

And shall do so ever , though I took him at his prayers . Fare you well , my lord ; and believe this of me , there can be no kernel in this light nut ; the soul of this man is his clothes . Trust him not in matter of heavy consequence ; I have kept of them tame , and know their natures . Farewell , monsieur : I have spoken better of you than you have or will to deserve at my hand ; but we must do good against evil .


An idle lord , I swear .

I think not so .

Why , do you not know him ?

Yes , I do know him well ; and common speech 
Gives him a worthy pass . Here comes my clog .


I have , sir , as I was commanded from you ,
Spoke with the king , and have procur'd his leave 
For present parting ; only , he desires 
Some private speech with you .

I shall obey his will .
You must not marvel , Helen , at my course ,
Which holds not colour with the time , nor does 
The ministration and required office 
On my particular : prepar'd I was not 
For such a business ; therefore am I found 
So much unsettled . This drives me to entreat you 
That presently you take your way for home ;
And rather muse than ask why I entreat you ;
For my respects are better than they seem ,
And my appointments have in them a need 
Greater than shows itself at the first view 
To you that know them not . This to my mother .

'Twill be two days ere I shall see you , so 
I leave you to your wisdom .

Sir , I can nothing say ,
But that I am your most obedient servant .

Come , come , no more of that .

And ever shall 
With true observance seek to eke out that 
Wherein toward me my homely stars have fail'd 
To equal my great fortune .

Let that go :
My haste is very great . Farewell : hie home .

Pray sir , your pardon .

Well , what would you say ?

I am not worthy of the wealth I owe ,
Nor dare I say 'tis mine , and yet it is ;
But , like a timorous thief , most fain would steal 
What law does vouch mine own .

What would you have ?

Something , and scarce so much : nothing , indeed .
I would not tell you what I would , my lord :
Faith , yes ;
Strangers and foes do sunder , and not kiss .

I pray you , stay not , but in haste to horse .

I shall not break your bidding , good my lord .

Farewell .

Go thou toward home ; where I will never come 
Whilst I can shake my sword or hear the drum .
Away ! and for our flight .

Bravely , coragio !

So that from point to point now have you heard 
The fundamental reasons of this war ,
Whose great decision hath much blood let forth ,
And more thirsts after .

Holy seems the quarrel 
Upon your Grace's part ; black and fearful 
On the opposer .

Therefore we marvel much our cousin France 
Would in so just a business shut his bosom 
Against our borrowing prayers .

Good my lord ,
The reasons of our state I cannot yield ,
But like a common and an outward man ,
That the great figure of a council frames 
By self-unable motion : therefore dare not 
Say what I think of it , since I have found 
Myself in my incertain grounds to fail 
As often as I guess'd .

Be it his pleasure .

But I am sure the younger of our nature ,
That surfeit on their ease , will day by day 
Come here for physic .

Welcome shall they be ,
And all the honours that can fly from us 
Shall on them settle . You know your places well ;
When better fall , for your avails they fell .
To-morrow to the field .


It hath happened all as I would have had it , save that he comes not along with her .

By my troth , I take my young lord to be a very melancholy man .

By what observance , I pray you ?

Why , he will look upon his boot and sing ; mend the ruff and sing ; ask questions and sing ; pick his teeth and sing . I know a man that had this trick of melancholy sold a goodly manor for a song .

Let me see what he writes , and when he means to come .

I have no mind to Isbel since I was at court . Our old ling and our Isbels o' the country are nothing like your old ling and your Isbels o' the court : the brains of my Cupid's knocked out , and I begin to love , as an old man loves money , with no stomach .

What have we here ?

E'en that you have there .


I have sent you a daughter-in-law : she hath recovered the king , and undone me . I have wedded her , not bedded her ; and sworn to make the 'not' eternal . You shall hear I am ran away : know it before the report come . If there be breadth enough in the world , I will hold a long distance . My duty to you .
Your unfortunate son ,
This is not well : rash and unbridled boy ,
To fly the favours of so good a king !
To pluck his indignation on thy head 
By the misprising of a maid too virtuous 
For the contempt of empire !


O madam ! yonder is heavy news within between two soldiers and my young lady .

What is the matter ?

Nay , there is some comfort in the news , some comfort ; your son will not be killed so soon as I thought he would .

Why should he be killed ?

So say I , madam , if he run away , as I hear he does : the danger is in standing to't ; that's the loss of men , though it be the getting of children . Here they come will tell you more ; for my part , I only hear your son was run away .

Save you , good madam .

Madam , my lord is gone , for ever gone .

Do not say so .

Think upon patience . Pray you , gentlemen ,
I have felt so many quirks of joy and grief ,
That the first face of neither , on the start ,
Can woman me unto 't : where is my son , I pray you ?

Madam , he's gone to serve the Duke of Florence :
We met him thitherward ; for thence we came ,
And , after some dispatch in hand at court ,
Thither we bend again .

Look on his letter , madam ; here's my passport .
When thou canst get the ring upon my finger , which never shall come off , and show me a child begotten of thy body that I am father to , then call me husband : but in such a 'then' I write a 'never .' 
This is a dreadful sentence .

Brought you this letter , gentlemen ?

Ay , madam ;
And for the contents' sake are sorry for our pains .

I prithee , lady , have a better cheer ;
If thou engrossest all the griefs are thine ,
Thou robb'st me of a moiety : he was my son ,
But I do wash his name out of my blood ,
And thou art all my child . Towards Florence is he ?

Ay , madam .

And to be a soldier ?

Such is his noble purpose ; and , believe't ,
The duke will lay upon him all the honour 
That good convenience claims .

Return you thither ?

Ay , madam , with the swiftest wing of speed .

Till I have no wife , I have nothing in France .
'Tis bitter .

Find you that there ?

Ay , madam .

'Tis but the boldness of his hand , haply , which his heart was not consenting to .

Nothing in France until he have no wife !
There's nothing here that is too good for him 
But only she ; and she deserves a lord 
That twenty such rude boys might tend upon ,
And call her hourly mistress . Who was with him ?

A servant only , and a gentleman 
Which I have some time known .

Parolles , was it not ?

Ay , my good lady , he .

A very tainted fellow , and full of wickedness .
My son corrupts a well-derived nature 
With his inducement .

Indeed , good lady ,
The fellow has a deal of that too much ,
Which holds him much to have .

Y'are welcome , gentlemen .
I will entreat you , when you see my son ,
To tell him that his sword can never win 
The honour that he loses : more I'll entreat you 
Written to bear along .

We serve you , madam ,
In that and all your worthiest affairs .

Not so , but as we change our courtesies .
Will you draw near ?


'Till I have no wife , I have nothing in France .' 
Nothing in France until he has no wife !
Thou shalt have none , Rousillon , none in France ;
Then hast thou all again . Poor lord ! is't I 
That chase thee from thy country , and expose 
Those tender limbs of thine to the event 
Of the non-sparing war ? and is it I 
That drive thee from the sportive court , where thou 
Wast shot at with fair eyes , to be the mark 
Of smoky muskets ? O you leaden messengers ,
That ride upon the violent speed of fire ,
Fly with false aim ; move the still-piecing air ,
That sings with piercing ; do not touch my lord !
Whoever shoots at him , I set him there ;
Whoever charges on his forward breast ,
I am the caitiff that do hold him to't ;
And , though I kill him not , I am the cause 
His death was so effected : better 'twere 
I met the ravin lion when he roar'd 
With sharp constraint of hunger ; better 'twere 
That all the miseries which nature owes 
Were mine at once . No , come thou home , Rousillon ,
Whence honour but of danger wins a scar ,
As oft it loses all : I will be gone ;
My being here it is that holds thee hence :
Shall I stay here to do't ? no , no , although 
The air of paradise did fan the house ,
And angels offic'd all : I will be gone ,
That pitiful rumour may report my flight ,
To consolate thine ear . Come , night ; end , day !
For with the dark , poor thief , I'll steal away .


The general of our horse thou art ; and we ,
Great in our hope , lay our best love and credence 
Upon thy promising fortune .

Sir , it is 
A charge too heavy for my strength , but yet 
We'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake 
To the extreme edge of hazard .

Then go thou forth ,
And fortune play upon thy prosp'rous helm 
As thy auspicious mistress !

This very day ,
Great Mars , I put myself into thy file :
Make me but like my thoughts , and I shall prove 
A lover of thy drum , hater of love .


Alas ! and would you take the letter of her ?
Might you not know she would do as she has done ,
By sending me a letter ? Read it again .

I am Saint Jaques' pilgrim , thither gone :

Ambitious love hath so in me offended 
That bare-foot plod I the cold ground upon 
With sainted vow my faults to have amended .
Write , write , that from the bloody course of war ,
My dearest master , your dear son , may hie :
Bless him at home in peace , whilst I from far 
His name with zealous fervour sanctify :
His taken labours bid him me forgive ;
I , his despiteful Juno , sent him forth 
From courtly friends , with camping foes to live ,
Where death and danger dog the heels of worth :
He is too good and fair for Death and me ;
Whom I myself embrace , to set him free .


Ah , what sharp stings are in her mildest words !
Rinaldo , you did never lack advice so much ,
As letting her pass so : had I spoke with her ,
I could have well diverted her intents ,
Which thus she hath prevented .

Pardon me , madam :
If I had given you this at over-night 
She might have been o'erta'en ; and yet she writes ,
Pursuit would be but vain .

What angel shall 
Bless this unworthy husband ? he cannot thrive ,
Unless her prayers , whom heaven delights to hear ,
And loves to grant , reprieve him from the wrath 
Of greatest justice . Write , write , Rinaldo ,
To this unworthy husband of his wife ;
Let every word weigh heavy of her worth 
That he does weigh too light : my greatest grief ,
Though little he do feel it , set down sharply .
Dispatch the most convenient messenger :
When haply he shall hear that she is gone ,
He will return ; and hope I may that she ,
Hearing so much , will speed her foot again ,
Led hither by pure love . Which of them both 
Is dearest to me I have no skill in sense 
To make distinction . Provide this messenger .
My heart is heavy and mine age is weak ;
Grief would have tears , and sorrow bids me speak .


Nay , come ; for if they do approach the city we shall lose all the sight .

They say the French Count has done most honourable service .

It is reported that he has taken their greatest commander , and that with his own hand he slew the duke's brother . We have lost our labour ; they are gone a contrary way : hark ! you may know by their trumpets .

Come ; let's return again , and suffice ourselves with the report of it . Well , Diana , take heed of this French earl : the honour of a maid is her name , and no legacy is so rich as honesty .

I have told my neighbour how you have been solicited by a gentleman his companion .

I know that knave ; hang him ! one Parolles : a filthy officer he is in those suggestions for the young earl . Beware of them , Diana ; their promises , enticements , oaths , tokens , and all these engines of lust , are not the things they go under : many a maid hath been seduced by them ; and the misery is , example , that so terrible shows in the wrack of maidenhood , cannot for all that dissuade succession , but that they are limed with the twigs that threaten them . I hope I need not to advise you further ; but I hope your own grace will keep you where you are , though there were no further danger known but the modesty which is so lost .

You shall not need to fear me .

I hope so . Look , here comes a pilgrim :
I know she will lie at my house ; thither they send one another . I'll question her .

God save you , pilgrim ! whither are you bound ?

To Saint Jaques le Grand .
Where do the palmers lodge , I do beseech you ?

At the Saint Francis , here beside the port .

Is this the way ?

Ay , marry , is't . Hark you !

They come this way . If you will tarry , holy pilgrim ,
But till the troops come by ,
I will conduct you where you shall be lodg'd :
The rather , for I think I know your hostess 
As ample as myself .

Is it yourself ?

If you shall please so , pilgrim .

I thank you , and will stay upon your leisure .

You came , I think , from France ?

I did so .

Here you shall see a countryman of yours 
That has done worthy service .

His name , I pray you .

The Count Rousillon : know you such a one ?

But by the ear , that hears most nobly of him ;
His face I know not .

Whatsoe'er he is ,
He's bravely taken here . He stole from France ,
As 'tis reported , for the king had married him 
Against his liking . Think you it is so ?

Ay , surely , mere the truth : I know his lady .

There is a gentleman that serves the count 
Reports but coarsely of her .

What's his name ?

Monsieur Parolles .

O ! I believe with him ,
In argument of praise , or to the worth 
Of the great count himself , she is too mean 
To have her name repeated : all her deserving 
Is a reserved honesty , and that 
I have not heard examin'd .

Alas , poor lady !
'Tis a hard bondage to become the wife 
Of a detesting lord .

Ay , right ; good creature , wheresoe'er she is ,
Her heart weighs sadly . This young maid might do her 
A shrewd turn if she pleas'd .

How do you mean ?
May be the amorous count solicits her 
In the unlawful purpose .

He does , indeed ;
And brokes with all that can in such a suit 
Corrupt the tender honour of a maid :
But she is arm'd for him and keeps her guard 
In honestest defence .

The gods forbid else !


So , now they come .
That is Antonio , the duke's eldest son ;
That , Escalus .

Which is the Frenchman ?

He ;
That with the plume : 'tis a most gallant fellow ;
I would he lov'd his wife . If he were honester ,
He were much goodlier ; is't not a handsome gentleman ?

I like him well .

'Tis pity he is not honest . Yond's that same knave 
That leads him to these places : were I his lady 
I would poison that vile rascal .

Which is he ?

That jack-an-apes with scarfs . Why is he melancholy ?

Perchance he's hurt i' the battle .

Lose our drum ! well .

He's shrewdly vexed at something .
Look , he has spied us .

Marry , hang you !

And your courtesy , for a ring-carrier !


The troop is past . Come , pilgrim , I will bring you 
Where you shall host : of enjoin'd penitents 
There's four or five , to great Saint Jaques bound ,
Already at my house .

I humbly thank you .
Please it this matron and this gentle maid 
To eat with us to-night , the charge and thanking 
Shall be for me ; and , to requite you further ,
I will bestow some precepts of this virgin 
Worthy the note .

We'll take your offer kindly .


Nay , good my lord , put him to't : let him have his way .

If your lordship find him not a hilding , hold me no more in your respect .

On my life , my lord , a bubble .

Do you think I am so far deceived in him ?

Believe it , my lord , in mine own direct knowledge , without any malice , but to speak of him as my kinsman , he's a most notable coward , an infinite and endless liar , an hourly promise-breaker , the owner of no one good quality worthy your lordship's entertainment .

It were fit you knew him ; lest , reposing too far in his virtue , which he hath not , he might at some great and trusty business in a main danger fail you .

I would I knew in what particular action to try him .

None better than to let him fetch off his drum , which you hear him so confidently undertake to do .

I , with a troop of Florentines , will suddenly surprise him : such I will have whom I am sure he knows not from the enemy . We will bind and hood wink him so , that he shall suppose no other but that he is carried into the leaguer of the adversaries , when we bring him to our own tents . Be but your lordship present at his examination : if he do not , for the promise of his life and in the highest compulsion of base fear , offer to betray you and deliver all the intelligence in his power against you , and that with the divine forfeit of his soul upon oath , never trust my judgment in anything .

O ! for the love of laughter , let him fetch his drum : he says he has a stratagem for't . When your lordship sees the bottom of his success in't , and to what metal this counterfeit lump of ore will be melted , if you give him not John Drum's entertainment , your inclining cannot be removed . Here he comes .

O ! for the love of laughter , hinder not the honour of his design : let him fetch off his drum in any hand .


How now , monsieur ! this drum sticks sorely in your disposition .

A pox on't ! let it go : 'tis but a drum .

'But a drum !' Is't 'but a drum ?' A drum so lost ! There was excellent command , to charge in with our horse upon our own wings , and to rend our own soldiers !

That was not to be blamed in the command of the service : it was a disaster of war that C sar himself could not have prevented if he had been there to command .

Well , we cannot greatly condemn our success : some dishonour we had in the loss of that drum ; but it is not to be recovered .

It might have been recovered .

It might ; but it is not now .

It is to be recovered . But that the merit of service is seldom attributed to the true and exact performer , I would have that drum or another , or hic jacet .

Why , if you have a stomach to't , monsieur , if you think your mystery in stratagem can bring this instrument of honour again into its native quarter , be magnanimous in the enterprise and go on ; I will grace the attempt for a worthy exploit : if you speed well in it , the duke shall both speak of it , and extend to you what further becomes his greatness , even to the utmost syllable of your worthiness .

By the hand of a soldier , I will undertake it .

But you must not now slumber in it .

I'll about it this evening : and I will presently pen down my dilemmas , encourage myself in my certainty , put myself into my mortal preparation , and by midnight look to hear further from me .

May I be bold to acquaint his Grace you are gone about it ?

I know not what the success will be , my lord ; but the attempt I vow .

I know thou'rt valiant ; and , to the possibility of thy soldiership , will subscribe for thee . Farewell .

I love not many words .


No more than a fish loves water . Is not this a strange fellow , my lord , that so confidently seems to undertake this business , which he knows is not to be done ; damns himself to do , and dares better be damned than to do't ?

You do not know him , my lord , as we do : certain it is , that he will steal himself into a man's favour , and for a week escape a great deal of discoveries ; but when you find him out you have him ever after .

Why , do you think he will make no deed at all of this that so seriously he does address himself unto ?

None in the world ; but return with an invention and clap upon you two or three probable lies . But we have almost embossed him , you shall see his fall to-night ; for , indeed , he is not for your lordship's respect .

We'll make you some sport with the fox ere we case him . He was first smoked by the old Lord Lafeu : when his disguise and he is parted , tell me what a sprat you shall find him ; which you shall see this very night .

I must go look my twigs : he shall be caught .

Your brother he shall go along with me .

As't please your lordship : I'll leave you .


Now will I lead you to the house , and show you 
The lass I spoke of .

But you say she's honest .

That's all the fault . I spoke with her but once ,
And found her wondrous cold ; but I sent to her ,
By this same coxcomb that we have i' the wind ,
Tokens and letters which she did re-send ;
And this is all I have done . She's a fair creature ;
Will you go see her ?

With all my heart , my lord .


If you misdoubt me that I am not she ,
I know not how I shall assure you further ,
But I shall lose the grounds I work upon .

Though my estate be fall'n , I was well born ,
Nothing acquainted with these businesses ;
And would not put my reputation now 
In any staining act .

Nor would I wish you .
First , give me trust , the county is my husband ,
And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken 
Is so from word to word ; and then you cannot ,
By the good aid that I of you shall borrow ,
Err in bestowing it .

I should believe you :
For you have show'd me that which well approves 
You're great in fortune .

Take this purse of gold ,
And let me buy your friendly help thus far ,
Which I will over-pay and pay again 
When I have found it . The county woos your daughter ,
Lays down his wanton siege before her beauty ,
Resolv'd to carry her : let her in fine consent ,
As we'll direct her how 'tis best to bear it .
Now , his important blood will nought deny 
That she'll demand : a ring the county wears ,
That down ward hath succeeded in his house 
From son to son , some four or five descents 
Since the first father wore it : this ring he holds 
In most rich choice ; yet , in his idle fire ,
To buy his will , it would not seem too dear ,
Howe'er repented after .

Now I see 
The bottom of your purpose .

You see it lawful then . It is no more ,
But that your daughter , ere she seems as won ,
Desires this ring , appoints him an encounter ,
In fine , delivers me to fill the time ,
Herself most chastely absent . After this ,
To marry her , I'll add three thousand crowns 
To what is past already .

I have yielded .
Instruct my daughter how she shall persever ,
That time and place with this deceit so lawful 
May prove coherent . Every night he comes 
With musics of all sorts and songs compos'd 
To her unworthiness : it nothing steads us 
To chide him from our eaves , for he persists 
As if his life lay on't .

Why then to-night 
Let us assay our plot ; which , if it speed ,
Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed ,
And lawful meaning in a lawful act ,
Where both not sin , and yet a sinful fact .
But let's about it .

He can come no other way but by this hedge-corner . When you sally upon him , speak what terrible language you will : though you understand it not yourselves , no matter ; for we must not seem to understand him , unless some one among us , whom we must produce for an interpreter .

Good captain , let me be the interpreter .

Art not acquainted with him ? knows he not thy voice ?

No , sir , I warrant you .

But what linsey-woolsey hast thou to speak to us again ?

Even such as you speak to me .

He must think us some band of strangers i' the adversary's entertainment . Now , he hath a smack of all neighbouring languages ; therefore we must every one be a man of his own fancy , not to know what we speak one to another ; so we seem to know , is to know straight our purpose : chough's language , gabble enough , and good enough . As for you , interpreter , you must seem very politic . But couch , ho ! here he comes , to beguile two hours in a sleep , and then to return and swear the lies he forges .


Ten o'clock : within these three hours 'twill be time enough to go home . What shall I say I have done ? It must be a very plausive invention that carries it . They begin to smoke me , and disgraces have of late knocked too often at my door . I find my tongue is too foolhardy ; but my heart hath the fear of Mars before it and of his creatures , not daring the reports of my tongue .

This is the first truth that e'er thine own tongue was guilty of .

What the devil should move me to undertake the recovery of this drum , being not ignorant of the impossibility , and knowing I had no such purpose ? I must give myself some hurts and say I got them in exploit . Yet slight ones will not carry it : they will say , 'Came you off with so little ?' and great ones I dare not give . Wherefore , what's the instance ? Tongue , I must put you into a butter-woman's mouth , and buy myself another of Bajazet's mute , if you prattle me into these perils .

Is it possible he should know what he is , and be that he is ?

I would the cutting of my garments would serve the turn or the breaking of my Spanish sword .

We cannot afford you so .

Or the baring of my beard , and to say it was in stratagem .

'Twould not do .

Or to drown my clothes , and say I was stripped .

Hardly serve .

Though I swore I leaped from the window of the citadel 

How deep ?

Thirty fathom .

Three great oaths would scarce make that be believed .

I would I had any drum of the enemy's :
I would swear I recovered it .

Thou shalt hear one anon .

A drum now of the enemy's !


Throca movousus , cargo , cargo , cargo .

Cargo , cargo , villianda par corbo , cargo .


O ! ransom , ransom ! Do not hide mine eyes .

Boskos thromuldo boskos .

I know you are the Muskos' regiment ;
And I shall lose my life for want of language .
If there be here German , or Dane , low Dutch ,
Italian , or French , let him speak to me :
I will discover that which shall undo 
The Florentine .

Boskos vauvado :
I understand thee , and can speak thy tongue :
Kerelybonto : Sir ,
Betake thee to thy faith , for seventeen poniards 
Are at thy bosom .

O !

O ! pray , pray , pray .
Manka revania dulche .

Oscorbidulchos volivorco .

The general is content to spare thee yet ;
And , hoodwink'd as thou art , will lead thee on 
To gather from thee : haply thou may'st inform 
Something to save thy life .

O ! let me live ,
And all the secrets of our camp I'll show ,
Their force , their purposes ; nay , I'll speak that 
Which you will wonder at .

But wilt thou faithfully ?

If I do not , damn me .

Acordo linta .
Come on ; thou art granted space .


Go , tell the Count Rousillon , and my brother ,
We have caught the woodcock , and will keep him muffled 
Till we do hear from them .

Captain , I will .

A' will betray us all unto ourselves :
Inform on that .

So I will , sir .

Till then , I'll keep him dark and safely lock'd .


They told me that your name was Fontibell .

No , my good lord , Diana .

Titled goddess ;
And worth it , with addition ! But , fair soul ,
In your fine frame hath love no quality ?
If the quick fire of youth light not your mind ,
You are no maiden , but a monument :
When you are dead , you should be such a one 
As you are now , for you are cold and stern ;
And now you should be as your mother was 
When your sweet self was got .

She then was honest .

So should you be .

No :
My mother did but duty ; such , my lord ,
As you owe to your wife .

No more o' that !
I prithee do not strive against my vows .
I was compell'd to her ; but I love thee 
By love's own sweet constraint , and will for ever 
Do thee all rights of service .

Ay , so you serve us 
Till we serve you ; but when you have our roses ,
You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves 
And mock us with our bareness .

How have I sworn !

'Tis not the many oaths that make the truth ,
But the plain single vow that is vow'd true .
What is not holy , that we swear not by ,
But take the Highest to witness : then , pray you , tell me ,
If I should swear by God's great attributes 
I lov'd you dearly , would you believe my oaths ,
When I did love you ill ? this has no holding ,
To swear by him whom I protest to love ,
That I will work against him : therefore your oaths 
Are words and poor conditions , but unseal'd ;
At least in my opinion .

Change it , change it .
Be not so holy-cruel : love is holy ;
And my integrity ne'er knew the crafts 
That you do charge men with . Stand no more off ,
But give thyself unto my sick desires ,
Who then recover : say thou art mine , and ever 
My love as it begins shall so persever .

I see that men make ropes in such a scarr 
That we'll forsake ourselves . Give me that ring .

I'll lend it thee , my dear ; but have no power 
To give it from me .

Will you not , my lord ?

It is an honour 'longing to our house ,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors ,
Which were the greatest obloquy i' the world 
In me to lose .

Mine honour's such a ring :
My chastity's the jewel of our house ,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors ,
Which were the greatest obloquy i' the world 
In me to lose . Thus your own proper wisdom 
Brings in the champion honour on my part 
Against your vain assault .

Here , take my ring :
My house , mine honour , yea , my life , be thine ,
And I'll be bid by thee .

When midnight comes , knock at my chamber-window :
I'll order take my mother shall not hear .
Now will I charge you in the band of truth ,
When you have conquer'd my yet maiden bed ,
Remain there but an hour , nor speak to me .
My reasons are most strong ; and you shall know them 
When back again this ring shall be deliver'd :
And on your finger in the night I'll put 
Another ring , that what in time proceeds 
May token to the future our past deeds .
Adieu , till then ; then , fail not . You have won 
A wife of me , though there my hope be done .

A heaven on earth I have won by wooing thee .


For which live long to thank both heaven and me !
You may so in the end .
My mother told me just how he would woo 
As if she sat in 's heart ; she says all men 
Have the like oaths : he had sworn to marry me 
When his wife's dead ; therefore I'll lie with him 
When I am buried . Since Frenchmen are so braid ,
Marry that will , I live and die a maid :
Only in this disguise I think't no sin 
To cozen him that would unjustly win .


You have not given him his mother's letter ?

I have delivered it an hour since : there is something in't that stings his nature , for on the reading it he changed almost into another man .

He has much worthy blame laid upon him for shaking off so good a wife and so sweet a lady .

Especially he hath incurred the everlasting displeasure of the king , who had even tuned his bounty to sing happiness to him . I will tell you a thing , but you shall let it dwell darkly with you .

When you have spoken it , 'tis dead , and I am the grave of it .

He hath perverted a young gentlewoman here in Florence , of a most chaste renown ; and this night he fleshes his will in the spoil of her honour : he hath given her his monumental ring , and thinks himself made in the unchaste composition .

Now , God delay our rebellion ! as we are ourselves , what things are we !

Merely our own traitors : and as in the common course of all treasons , we still see them reveal themselves , till they attain to their abhorred ends , so he that in this action contrives against his own nobility , in his proper stream o'erflows himself .

Is it not most damnable in us , to be trumpeters of our unlawful intents ? We shall not then have his company to-night ?

Not till after midnight , for he is dieted to his hour .

That approaches apace : I would gladly have him see his company anatomized , that he might take a measure of his own judgments , wherein so curiously he had set this counterfeit .

We will not meddle with him till he come , for his presence must be the whip of the other .

In the meantime what near you of these wars ?

I hear there is an overture of peace .

Nay , I assure you , a peace concluded .

What will Count Rousillon do then ? will he travel higher , or return again into France ?

I perceive by this demand , you are not altogether of his council .

Let it be forbid , sir ; so should I be a great deal of his act .

Sir , his wife some two months since fled from his house : her pretence is a pilgrimage to Saint Jaques le Grand ; which holy undertaking with most austere sanctimony she accomplished ; and , there residing , the tenderness of her nature became as a prey to her grief ; in fine , made a groan of her last breath , and now she sings in heaven .

How is this justified ?

The stronger part of it by her own letters , which make her story true , even to the point of her death : her death itself , which could not be her office to say is come , was faithfully confirmed by the rector of the place .

Hath the count all this intelligence ?

Ay , and the particular confirmations , point from point , to the full arming of the verity .

I am heartily sorry that he'll be glad of this .

How mightily sometimes we make us comforts of our losses !

And how mightily some other times we drown our gain in tears ! The great dignity that his valour hath here acquired for him shall at home be encountered with a shame as ample .

The web of our life is of a mingled yarn , good and ill together : our virtues would be proud if our faults whipped them not ; and our crimes would despair if they were not cherished by our virtues .

How now ! where's your master ?

He met the duke in the street , sir , of whom he hath taken a solemn leave : his lordship will next morning for France . The duke hath offered him letters of commendations to the king .

They shall be no more than needful there , if they were more than they can commend .

They cannot be too sweet for the king's tartness . Here's his lordship now .

How now , my lord ! is't not after midnight ?

I have to-night dispatched sixteen businesses , a month's length a-piece , by an abstract of success : I have conge'd with the duke , done my adieu with his nearest , buried a wife , mourned for her , writ to my lady mother I am returning , entertained my convoy ; and between these main parcels of dispatch effected many nicer needs : the last was the greatest , but that I have not ended yet .

If the business be of any difficulty , and this morning your departure hence , it requires haste of your lordship .

I mean , the business is not ended , as fearing to hear of it hereafter . But shall we have this dialogue between the fool and the soldier ? Come , bring forth this counterfeit model : he has deceived me , like a double-meaning prophesier .

Bring him forth .

Has sat i' the stocks all night , poor gallant knave .

No matter ; his heels have deserved it , in usurping his spurs so long . How does he carry himself ?

I have told your lordship already , the stocks carry him . But to answer you as you would be understood ; he weeps like a wench that had shed her milk : he hath confessed himself to Morgan ,whom he supposes to be a friar ,from the time of his remembrance to this very instant disaster of his setting i' the stocks : and what think you he hath confessed ?

Nothing of me , has a' ?

His confession is taken , and it shall be read to his face : if your lordship be in't , as I believe you are , you must have the patience to hear it .


A plague upon him ! muffled ! he can say nothing of me : hush ! hush !

Hoodman comes ! Porto tartarossa .

He calls for the tortures : what will you say without 'em ?

I will confess what I know without constraint : if ye pinch me like a pasty , I can say no more .

Bosko chimurcho .

Boblibindo chicurmurco .

You are a merciful general . Our general bids you answer to what I shall ask you out of a note .

And truly , as I hope to live .

First , demand of him how many horse the duke is strong . What say you to that ?

Five or six thousand ; but very weak and unserviceable : the troops are all scattered , and the commanders very poor rogues , upon my reputation and credit , and as I hope to live .

Shall I set down your answer so ?

Do : I'll take the sacrament on't , how and which way you will .

All's one to him . What a past-saving slave is this !

You are deceived , my lord : this is Monsieur Parolles , the gallant militarist ,that was his own phrase ,that had the whole theorick of war in the knot of his scarf , and the practice in the chape of his dagger .

I will never trust a man again for keeping his sword clean ; nor believe he can have everything in him by wearing his apparel neatly .

Well , that's set down .

Five or six thousand horse , I said ,I will say true ,or thereabouts , set down , for I'll speak truth .

He's very near the truth in this .

But I con him no thanks for't , in the nature he delivers it .

Poor rogues , I pray you , say .

Well , that's set down .

I humbly thank you , sir . A truth's a truth ; the rogues are marvellous poor .

Demand of him , of what strength they are a-foot . What say you to that ?

By my troth , sir , if I were to live this present hour , I will tell true . Let me see : Spurio , a hundred and fifty ; Sebastian , so many ; Corambus , so many ; Jaques , so many ; Guiltian , Cosmo , Lodowick , and Gratii , two hundred fifty each ; mine own company , Chitopher , Vaumond , Bentii , two hundred fifty each : so that the muster-file , rotten and sound , upon my life , amounts not to fifteen thousand poll ; half of the which dare not shake the snow from off their cassocks , lest they shake themselves to pieces .

What shall be done to him ?

Nothing , but let him have thanks . Demand of him my condition , and what credit I have with the duke .

Well , that's set down . You shall demand of him , whether one Captain Dumain be i' the camp , a Frenchman ; what his reputation is with the duke ; what his valour , honesty , and expertness in wars ; or whether he thinks it were not possible , with well-weighing sums of gold , to corrupt him to a revolt . What say you to this ? what do you know of it ?

I beseech you , let me answer to the particular of the inter'gatories : demand them singly .

Do you know this Captain Dumain ?

I know him : a' was a botcher's 'prentice in Paris , from whence he was whipped for getting the shrieve's fool with child ; a dumb innocent , that could not say him nay .


Nay , by your leave , hold your hands ; though I know his brains are forfeit to the next tile that falls .

Well , is this captain in the Duke of Florence's camp ?

Upon my knowledge he is , and lousy .

Nay , look not so upon me ; we shall hear of your lordship anon .

What is his reputation with the duke ?

The duke knows him for no other but a poor officer of mine , and writ to me this other day to turn him out o' the band : I think I have his letter in my pocket .

Marry , we'll search .

In good sadness , I do not know : either it is there , or it is upon a file with the duke's other letters in my tent .

Here 'tis ; here's a paper ; shall I read it to you ?

I do not know if it be it or no .

Our interpreter does it well .

Excellently .

Dian , the count's a fool , and full of gold 

That is not the duke's letter , sir ; that is an advertisement to a proper maid in Florence , one Diana , to take heed of the allurement of one Count Rousillon , a foolish idle boy , but for all that very ruttish . I pray you , sir , put it up again .

Nay , I'll read it first , by your favour .

My meaning in't , I protest , was very honest in the behalf of the maid ; for I knew the young count to be a dangerous and lascivious boy , who is a whale to virginity , and devours up all the fry it finds .

Damnable both-sides rogue !

When he swears oaths , bid him drop gold , and take it ;
After he scores , he never pays the score :
Half won is match well made ; match , and well make it ;
He ne'er pays after-debts ; take it before ,
And say a soldier , Dian , told thee this ,
Men are to mell with , boys are not to kiss ;
For count of this , the count's a fool , I know it ,
Who pays before , but not when he does owe it .

Thine , as he vow'd to thee in thine ear ,

He shall be whipped through the army with this rime in's forehead .

This is your devoted friend , sir ; the manifold linguist and the armipotent soldier .

I could endure anything before but a cat , and now he's a cat to me .

I perceive , sir , by our general's looks , we shall be fain to hang you .

My life , sir , in any case ! not that I am afraid to die ; but that , my offences being many , I would repent out the remainder of nature . Let me live , sir , in a dungeon , i' the stocks , or anywhere , so I may live .

We'll see what may be done , so you confess freely : therefore , once more to this Captain Dumain . You have answered to his reputation with the duke and to his valour : what is his honesty ?

He will steal , sir , an egg out of a cloister ; for rapes and ravishments he parallels Nessus ; he professes not keeping of oaths ; in breaking 'em he is stronger than Hercules ; he will lie , sir , with such volubility , that you would think truth were a fool ; drunkenness is his best virtue , for he will be swine-drunk , and in his sleep he does little harm , save to his bed-clothes about him ; but they know his conditions , and lay him in straw . I have but little more to say , sir , of his honesty : he has everything that an honest man should not have ; what an honest man should have , he has nothing .

I begin to love him for this .

For this description of thine honesty ? A pox upon him for me ! he is more and more a cat .

What say you to his expertness in war ?

Faith , sir , he has led the drum before the English tragedians ,to belie him I will not ,and more of his soldiership I know not ; except , in that country , he had the honour to be the officer at a place there called Mile-end , to instruct for the doubling of files : I would do the man what honour I can , but of this I am not certain .

He hath out-villained villany so far , that the rarity redeems him .

A pox on him ! he's a cat still .

His qualities being at this poor price , I need not ask you , if gold will corrupt him to revolt .

Sir , for a cardecu he will sell the fee-simple of his salvation , the inheritance of it ; and cut the entail from all remainders , and a perpetual succession for it perpetually .

What's his brother , the other Captain Dumain ?

Why does he ask him or me ?

What's he ?

E'en a crow o' the same nest ; not altogether so great as the first in goodness , but greater a great deal in evil . He excels his brother for a coward , yet his brother is reputed one of the best that is . In a retreat he out-runs any lackey ; marry , in coming on he has the cramp .

If your life be saved , will you undertake to betray the Florentine ?

Ay , and the captain of his horse , Count Rousillon .

I'll whisper with the general , and know his pleasure .

I'll no more drumming ; a plague of all drums ! Only to seem to deserve well , and to beguile the supposition of that lascivious young boy the count , have I run into this danger . Yet who would have suspected an ambush where I was taken ?

There is no remedy , sir , but you must die . The general says , you , that have so traitorously discovered the secrets of your army , and made such pestiferous reports of men very nobly held , can serve the world for no honest use ; therefore you must die . Come , headsman , off with his head .

O Lord , sir , let me live , or let me see my death !

That shall you , and take your leave of all your friends .

So , look about you : know you any here ?

Good morrow , noble captain .

God bless you , Captain Parolles .

God save you , noble captain .

Captain , what greeting will you to my Lord Lafeu ? I am for France .

Good captain , will you give me a copy of the sonnet you writ to Diana in behalf of the Count Rousillon ? an I were not a very coward I'd compel it of you ; but fare you well .


You are undone , captain ; all but your scarf ; that has a knot on't yet .

Who cannot be crushed with a plot ?

If you could find out a country where but women were that had received so much shame , you might begin an impudent nation . Fare ye well , sir ; I am for France too : we shall speak of you there .


Yet am I thankful : if my heart were great 
'Twould burst at this . Captain I'll be no more ;
But I will eat and drink , and sleep as soft 
As captain shall : simply the thing I am 
Shall make me live . Who knows himself a braggart ,
Let him fear this ; for it will come to pass 
That every braggart shall be found an ass .
Rust , sword ! cool , blushes ! and Parolles , live 
Safest in shame ! being fool'd , by foolery thrive !
There's place and means for every man alive .
I'll after them .


That you may well perceive I have not wrong'd you ,
One of the greatest in the Christian world 
Shall be my surety ; 'fore whose throne 'tis needful ,
Ere I can perfect mine intents , to kneel .
Time was I did him a desired office ,
Dear almost as his life ; which gratitude 
Through flinty Tartar's bosom would peep forth ,
And answer , thanks . I duly am inform'd 
His Grace is at Marseilles ; to which place 
We have convenient convoy . You must know ,
I am supposed dead : the army breaking ,
My husband hies him home ; where , heaven aiding ,
And by the leave of my good lord the king ,
We'll be before our welcome .

Gentle madam ,
You never had a servant to whose trust 
Your business was more welcome .

Nor you , mistress ,
Ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labour 
To recompense your love . Doubt not but heaven 
Hath brought me up to be your daughter's dower ,
As it hath fated her to be my motive 
And helper to a husband . But , O strange men !
That can such sweet use make of what they hate ,
When saucy trusting of the cozen'd thoughts 
Defiles the pitchy night : so lust doth play 
With what it loathes for that which is away .
But more of this hereafter . You , Diana ,
Under my poor instructions yet must suffer 
Something in my behalf .

Let death and honesty 
Go with your impositions , I am yours 
Upon your will to suffer .

Yet , I pray you :
But with the word the time will bring on summer ,
When briers shall have leaves as well as thorns ,
And be as sweet as sharp . We must away ;
Our waggon is prepar'd , and time revives us :
All's well that ends well : still the fine's the crown ;
Whate'er the course , the end is the renown .


No , no , no ; your son was misled with a snipt-taffeta fellow there , whose villanous saffron would have made all the unbaked and doughy youth of a nation in his colour : your daughter-in-law had been alive at this hour , and your son here at home , more advanced by the king than by that red-tailed humble-bee I speak of .

I would I had not known him ; it was the death of the most virtuous gentlewoman that ever nature had praise for creating . If she had partaken of my flesh , and cost me the dearest groans of a mother , I could not have owed her a more rooted love .

'Twas a good lady , 'twas a good lady : we may pick a thousand salads ere we light on such another herb .

Indeed , sir , she was the sweet-marjoram of the salad , or , rather the herb of grace .

They are not salad-herbs , you knave ; they are nose-herbs .

I am no great Nebuchadnezzar , sir ; I have not much skill in grass .

Whether dost thou profess thyself , a knave , or a fool ?

A fool , sir , at a woman's service , and a knave at a man's .

Your distinction ?

I would cozen the man of his wife , and do his service .

So you were a knave at his service , indeed .

And I would give his wife my bauble , sir , to do her service .

I will subscribe for thee , thou art both knave and fool .

At your service .

No , no , no .

Why , sir , if I cannot serve you , I can serve as great a prince as you are .

Who's that ? a Frenchman ?

Faith , sir , a' has an English name ; but his phisnomy is more hotter in France than there .

What prince is that ?

The black prince , sir ; alias , the prince of darkness ; alias , the devil .

Hold thee , there's my purse . I give thee not this to suggest thee from thy master thou talkest of : serve him still .

I am a woodland fellow , sir , that always loved a great fire ; and the master I speak of , ever keeps a good fire . But , sure , he is the prince of the world ; let his nobility remain in's court . I am for the house with the narrow gate , which I take to be too little for pomp to enter : some that humble themselves may ; but the many will be too chill and tender , and they'll be for the flowery way that leads to the broad gate and the great fire .

Go thy ways , I begin to be aweary of thee ; and I tell thee so before , because I would not fall out with thee . Go thy ways : let my horses be well looked to , without any tricks .

If I put any tricks upon 'em , sir , they shall be jade's tricks , which are their own right by the law of nature .


A shrewd knave and an unhappy .

So he is . My lord that's gone made himself much sport out of him : by his authority he remains here , which he thinks is a patent for his sauciness ; and , indeed , he has no pace , but runs where he will .

I like him well ; 'tis not amiss . And I was about to tell you , since I heard of the good lady's death , and that my lord your son was upon his return home , I moved the king my master to speak in the behalf of my daughter ; which , in the minority of them both , his majesty , out of a self-gracious remembrance , did first propose . His highness hath promised me to do it ; and to stop up the displeasure he hath conceived against your son , there is no fitter matter . How does your ladyship like it ?

With very much content , my lord ; and I wish it happily effected .

His highness comes post from Marseilles , of as able body as when he numbered thirty : he will be here to-morrow , or I am deceived by him that in such intelligence hath seldom failed .

It rejoices me that I hope I shall see him ere I die . I have letters that my son will be here to-night : I shall beseech your lordship to remain with me till they meet together .

Madam , I was thinking with what manners I might safely be admitted .

You need but plead your honourable privilege .

Lady , of that I have made a bold charter ; but I thank my God it holds yet .


O madam ! yonder's my lord your son with a patch of velvet on's face : whether there be a scar under it or no , the velvet knows ; but 'tis a goodly patch of velvet . His left cheek is a cheek of two pile and a half , but his right cheek is worn bare .

A scar nobly got , or a noble scar , is a good livery of honour ; so belike is that .

But it is your carbonadoed face .

Let us go see your son , I pray you : I long to talk with the young noble soldier .

Faith , there's a dozen of 'em , with delicate fine hats and most courteous feathers , which bow the head and nod at every man .

But this exceeding posting , day and night ,
Must wear your spirits low ; we cannot help it :
But since you have made the days and nights as one ,
To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs ,
Be bold you do so grow in my requital 
As nothing can unroot you . In happy time ;


This man may help me to his majesty's ear ,

If he would spend his power . God save you , sir .

And you .

Sir , I have seen you in the court of France .

I have been sometimes there .

I do presume , sir , that you are not fallen 
From the report that goes upon your goodness ;
And therefore , goaded with most sharp occasions ,
Which lay nice manners by , I put you to 
The use of your own virtues , for the which 
I shall continue thankful .

What's your will ?

That it will please you 
To give this poor petition to the king ,
And aid me with that store of power you have 
To come into his presence .

The king's not here .

Not here , sir !

Not , indeed :
He hence remov'd last night , and with more haste 
Than is his use .

Lord , how we lose our pains !

All's well that ends well yet ,
Though time seems so adverse and means unfit .
I do beseech you , whither is he gone ?

Marry , as I take it , to Rousillon ;
Whither I am going .

I do beseech you , sir ,
Since you are like to see the king before me ,
Commend the paper to his gracious hand ;
Which I presume shall render you no blame 
But rather make you thank your pains for it .
I will come after you with what good speed 
Our means will make us means .

This I'll do for you .

And you shall find yourself to be well thank'd ,
Whate'er falls more . We must to horse again :
Go , go , provide .


Good Monsieur Lavache , give my Lord Lafeu this letter . I have ere now , sir , been better known to you , when I have held familiarity with fresher clothes ; but I am now , sir , muddied in Fortune's mood , and smell somewhat strong of her strong displeasure .

Truly , Fortune's displeasure is but sluttish if it smell so strongly as thou speakest of : I will henceforth eat no fish of Fortune's buttering . Prithee , allow the wind .

Nay , you need not to stop your nose , sir : I spake but by a metaphor .

Indeed , sir , if your metaphor stink , I will stop my nose ; or against any man's metaphor . Prithee , get thee further .

Pray you , sir , deliver me this paper .

Foh ! prithee , stand away : a paper from Fortune's close-stool to give to a nobleman ! Look , here he comes himself .


Here is a purr of Fortune's , sir , or of Fortune's cat but not a musk-cat that has fallen into the unclean fishpond of her displeasure , and , as he says , is muddied withal . Pray you , sir , use the carp as you may , for he looks like a poor , decayed , ingenious , foolish , rascally knave . I do pity his distress in my similes of comfort , and leave him to your lordship .

My lord , I am a man whom Fortune hath cruelly scratched .

And what would you have me to do ? 'tis too late to pare her nails now . Wherein have you played the knave with Fortune that she should scratch you , who of herself is a good lady , and would not have knaves thrive long under her ? There's a cardecu for you . Let the justices make you and Fortune friends ; I am for other business .

I beseech your honour to hear me one single word .

You beg a single penny more : come , you shall ha't ; save your word .

My name , my good lord , is Parolles .

You beg more than one word then . Cox my passion ! give me your hand . How does your drum ?

O , my good lord ! you were the first that found me .

Was I , in sooth ? and I was the first that lost thee .

It lies in you , my lord , to bring me in some grace , for you did bring me out .

Out upon thee , knave ! dost thou put upon me at once both the office of God and the devil ? one brings thee in grace and the other brings thee out .

The king's coming ; I know by his trumpets . Sirrah , inquire further after me ; I had talk of you last night : though you are a fool and a knave , you shall eat : go to , follow .

I praise God for you .


We lost a jewel of her , and our esteem 
Was made much poorer by it : but your son ,
As mad in folly , lack'd the sense to know 
Her estimation home .

'Tis past , my liege ;
And I beseech your majesty to make it 
Natural rebellion , done i' the blaze of youth ;
When oil and fire , too strong for reason's force ,
O'erbears it and burns on .

My honour'd lady ,
I have forgiven and forgotten all ,
Though my revenges were high bent upon him ,
And watch'd the time to shoot .

This I must say ,
But first I beg my pardon ,the young lord 
Did to his majesty , his mother , and his lady ,
Offence of mighty note , but to himself 
The greatest wrong of all : he lost a wife 
Whose beauty did astonish the survey 
Of richest eyes , whose words all ears took captive ,
Whose dear perfection hearts that scorn'd to serve 
Humbly call'd mistress .

Praising what is lost 
Makes the remembrance dear . Well , call him hither ;
We are reconcil'd , and the first view shall kill 
All repetition . Let him not ask our pardon :
The nature of his great offence is dead ,
And deeper than oblivion we do bury 
The incensing relics of it : let him approach ,
A stranger , no offender ; and inform him 
So 'tis our will he should .

I shall , my liege .


What says he to your daughter ? have you spoke ?

All that he is hath reference to your highness .

Then shall we have a match . I have letters sent me ,
That set him high in fame .


He looks well on't .

I am not a day of season ,
For thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail 
In me at once ; but to the brightest beams 
Distracted clouds give way : so stand thou forth ;
The time is fair again .

My high-repented blames ,
Dear sovereign , pardon to me .

All is whole ;
Not one word more of the consumed time .
Let's take the instant by the forward top ,
For we are old , and on our quick'st decrees 
The inaudible and noiseless foot of time 
Steals ere we can effect them . You remember 
The daughter of this lord ?

Admiringly , my liege :
At first I stuck my choice upon her , ere my heart 
Durst make too bold a herald of my tongue ,
Where the impression of mine eye infixing ,
Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me ,
Which warp'd the line of every other favour ;
Scorn'd a fair colour , or express'd it stolen ;
Extended or contracted all proportions 
To a most hideous object : thence it came 
That she , whom all men prais'd , and whom myself ,
Since I have lost , have lov'd , was in mine eye 
The dust that did offend it .

Well excus'd :
That thou didst love her , strikes some scores away 
From the great compt . But love that comes too late ,
Like a remorseful pardon slowly carried ,
To the great sender turns a sour offence ,
Crying , 'That's good that's gone .' Our rasher faults 
Make trivial price of serious things we have ,
Not knowing them until we know their grave :
Oft our displeasures , to ourselves unjust ,
Destroy our friends and after weep their dust :
Our own love waking cries to see what's done ,
While shameful hate sleeps out the afternoon .
Be this sweet Helen's knell , and now forget her .
Send forth your amorous token for fair Maudlin :
The main consents are had ; and here we'll stay 
To see our widower's second marriage-day .

Which better than the first , O dear heaven , bless !
Or , ere they meet , in me , O nature , cesse !

Come on , my son , in whom my house's name 
Must be digested , give a favour from you 
To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter ,
That she may quickly come .

And every hair that's on't , Helen , that's dead ,
Was a sweet creature ; such a ring as this ,
The last that e'er I took her leave at court ,
I saw upon her finger .

Hers it was not .

Now , pray you , let me see it ; for mine eye ,
While I was speaking , oft was fasten'd to't .
This ring was mine ; and , when I gave it Helen ,
I bade her , if her fortunes ever stood 
Necessitied to help , that by this token 
I would relieve her . Had you that craft to reave her 
Of what should stead her most ?

My gracious sovereign ,
Howe'er it pleases you to take it so ,
The ring was never hers .

Son , on my life ,
I have seen her wear it ; and she reckon'd it 
At her life's rate .

I am sure I saw her wear it .

You are deceiv'd , my lord , she never saw it :
In Florence was it from a casement thrown me ,
Wrapp'd in a paper , which contain'd the name 
Of her that threw it . Noble she was , and thought 
I stood engag'd : but when I had subscrib'd 
To mine own fortune , and inform'd her fully 
I could not answer in that course of honour 
As she had made the overture , she ceas'd ,
In heavy satisfaction , and would never 
Receive the ring again .

Plutus himself ,
That knows the tinct and multiplying medicine ,
Hath not in nature's mystery more science 
Than I have in this ring : 'twas mine , 'twas Helen's ,
Whoever gave it you . Then , if you know 
That you are well acquainted with yourself ,
Confess 'twas hers , and by what rough enforcement 
You got it from her . She call'd the saints to surety ,
That she would never put it from her finger 
Unless she gave it to yourself in bed ,
Where you have never come , or sent it us 
Upon her great disaster .

She never saw it .

Thou speak'st it falsely , as I love mine honour ;
And mak'st conjectural fears to come into me 
Which I would fain shut out . If it should prove 
That thou art so inhuman ,'twill not prove so ;
And yet I know not : thou didst hate her deadly ,
And she is dead ; which nothing , but to close 
Her eyes myself , could win me to believe ,
More than to see this ring . Take him away .

My fore-past proofs , howe'er the matter fall ,
Shall tax my fears of little vanity ,
Having vainly fear'd too little . Away with him !
We'll sift this matter further .

If you shall prove 
This ring was ever hers , you shall as easy 
Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence ,
Where yet she never was .


I am wrapp'd in dismal thinkings .


Gracious sovereign ,
Whether I have been to blame or no , I know not :
Here's a petition from a Florentine ,
Who hath , for four or five removes come short 
To tender it herself . I undertook it ,
Vanquish'd thereto by the fair grace and speech 
Of the poor suppliant , who by this I know 
Is here attending : her business looks in her 
With an importing visage , and she told me ,
In a sweet verbal brief , it did concern 
Your highness with herself .

"Upon his many protestations to marry me when his wife was dead , I blush to say it , he won me . Now is the Count Rousillon a widower : his vows are forfeited to me , and my honour's paid to him . He stole from Florence , taking no leave , and I follow him to his country for justice . Grant it me , O king ! in you it best lies ; otherwise a seducer flourishes , and a poor maid is undone . DIANA CAPILET ."

I will buy me a son-in-law in a fair , and toll for this : I'll none of him .

The heavens have thought well on thee , Lafeu ,
To bring forth this discovery . Seek these suitors :
Go speedily and bring again the count .

I am afeard the life of Helen , lady ,
Was foully snatch'd .

Now , justice on the doers !


I wonder , sir , sith wives are monsters to you ,
And that you fly them as you swear them lordship ,
Yet you desire to marry .

What woman's that ?

I am , my lord , a wretched Florentine ,
Derived from the ancient Capilet :
My suit , as I do understand , you know ,
And therefore know how far I may be pitied .

I am her mother , sir , whose age and honour 
Both suffer under this complaint we bring ,
And both shall cease , without your remedy .

Come hither , county ; do you know these women ?

My lord , I neither can nor will deny 
But that I know them : do they charge me further ?

Why do you look so strange upon your wife ?

She's none of mine , my lord .

If you shall marry ,
You give away this hand , and that is mine ;
You give away heaven's vows , and those are mine ;
You give away myself , which is known mine ;
For I by vow am so embodied yours 
That she which marries you must marry me ;
Either both or none .

Your reputation comes too short for my daughter : you are no husband for her .

My lord , this is a fond and desperate creature ,
Whom sometime I have laugh'd with : let your highness 
Lay a more noble thought upon mine honour 
Than for to think that I would sink it here .

Sir , for my thoughts , you have them ill to friend ,
Till your deeds gain them : fairer prove your honour ,
Than in my thought it lies .

Good my lord ,
Ask him upon his oath , if he does think 
He had not my virginity .

What sayst thou to her ?

She's impudent , my lord ;
And was a common gamester to the camp .

He does me wrong , my lord ; if I were so ,
He might have bought me at a common price :
Do not believe him . O ! behold this ring ,
Whose high respect and rich validity 
Did lack a parallel ; yet for all that 
He gave it to a commoner o' the camp ,
If I be one .

He blushes , and 'tis it :
Of six preceding ancestors , that gem 
Conferr'd by testament to the sequent issue ,
Hath it been ow'd and worn . This is his wife :
That ring's a thousand proofs .

Methought you said 
You saw one here in court could witness it .

I did , my lord , but loath am to produce 
So bad an instrument : his name's Parolles .

I saw the man to-day , if man he be .

Find him , and bring him hither .


What of him ?
He's quoted for a most perfidious slave ,
With all the spots of the world tax'd and debosh'd ,
Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth .
Am I or that or this for what he'll utter ,
That will speak anything ?

She hath that ring of yours .

I think she has : certain it is I lik'd her ,
And boarded her i' the wanton way of youth .
She knew her distance and did angle for me ,
Madding my eagerness with her restraint ,
As all impediments in fancy's course 
Are motives of more fancy ; and , in fine ,
Her infinite cunning , with her modern grace ,
Subdued me to her rate ; she got the ring ,
And I had that which any inferior might 
At market-price have bought .

I must be patient ;
You , that have turn'd off a first so noble wife ,
May justly diet me . I pray you yet ,
Since you lack virtue I will lose a husband ,
Send for your ring ; I will return it home ,
And give me mine again .

I have it not .

What ring was yours , I pray you ?

Sir , much like 
The same upon your finger .

Know you this ring ? this ring was his of late .

And this was it I gave him , being a-bed .

The story then goes false you threw it him 
Out of a casement .

I have spoke the truth .


My lord , I do confess the ring was hers .

You boggle shrewdly , every feather starts you .
Is this the man you speak of ?

Ay , my lord .

Tell me , sirrah , but tell me true , I charge you ,
Not fearing the displeasure of your master ,
Which , on your just proceeding I'll keep off ,
By him and by this woman here what know you ?

So please your majesty , my master hath been an honourable gentleman : tricks he hath had in him , which gentlemen have .

Come , come , to the purpose : did he love this woman ?

Faith , sir , he did love her ; but how ?

How , I pray you ?

He did love her , sir , as a gentleman loves a woman .

How is that ?

He loved her , sir , and loved her not .

As thou art a knave , and no knave .
What an equivocal companion is this !

I am a poor man , and at your majesty's command .

He is a good drum , my lord , but a naughty orator .

Do you know he promised me marriage ?

Faith , I know more than I'll speak .

But wilt thou not speak all thou knowest ?

Yes , so please your majesty . I did go between them , as I said ; but more than that , he loved her , for , indeed , he was mad for her , and talked of Satan , and of limbo , and of Furies , and I know not what : yet I was in that credit with them at that time , that I knew of their going to bed , and of other motions , as promising her marriage , and things which would derive me ill will to speak of : therefore I will not speak what I know .

Thou hast spoken all already , unless thou canst say they are married : but thou art too fine in thy evidence ; therefore stand aside . This ring , you say , was yours ?

Ay , my good lord .

Where did you buy it ? or who gave it you ?

It was not given me , nor I did not buy it .

Who lent it you ?

It was not lent me neither .

Where did you find it , then ?

I found it not .

If it were yours by none of all these ways ,
How could you give it him ?

I never gave it him .

This woman's an easy glove , my lord : she goes off and on at pleasure .

This ring was mine : I gave it his first wife .

It might be yours or hers , for aught I know .

Take her away ; I do not like her now .
To prison with her ; and away with him .
Unless thou tell'st me where thou hadst this ring 
Thou diest within this hour .

I'll never tell you .

Take her away .

I'll put in bail , my liege .

I think thee now some common customer .

By Jove , if ever I knew man , 'twas you .

Wherefore hast thou accus'd him all this while ?

Because he's guilty , and he is not guilty .
He knows I am no maid , and he'll swear to't ;
I'll swear I am a maid , and he knows not .
Great king , I am no strumpet , by my life ;
I am either maid , or else this old man's wife .


She does abuse our ears : to prison with her !

Good mother , fetch my bail .

Stay , royal sir ;
The jeweller that owes the ring is sent for ,
And he shall surety me . But for this lord ,
Who hath abus'd me , as he knows himself ,
Though yet he never harm'd me , here I quit him :
He knows himself my bed he hath defil'd ,
And at that time he got his wife with child :
Dead though she be , she feels her young one kick :
So there's my riddle : one that's dead is quick ;
And now behold the meaning .


Is there no exorcist 
Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes ?
Is't real that I see ?

No , my good lord ;
'Tis but the shadow of a wife you see ;
The name and not the thing .

Both , both . O ! pardon .

O my good lord ! when I was like this maid ,
I found you wondrous kind . There is your ring ;
And , look you , here's your letter ; this it says :
When from my finger you can get this ring ,
And are by me with child ,  &c . This is done :
Will you be mine , now you are doubly won ?

If she , my liege , can make me know this clearly ,
I'll love her dearly , ever , ever dearly .

If it appear not plain , and prove untrue ,
Deadly divorce step between me and you !
O ! my dear mother ; do I see you living ?

Mine eyes smell onions ; I shall weep anon .

Good Tom Drum , lend me a handkercher : so , I thank thee . Wait on me home , I'll make sport with thee : let thy curtsies alone , they are scurvy ones .

Let us from point to point this story know ,
To make the even truth in pleasure flow .


If thou be'st yet a fresh uncropped flower ,
Choose thou thy husband , and I'll pay thy dower ;
For I can guess that by thy honest aid 
Thou keptst a wife herself , thyself a maid .
Of that , and all the progress , more and less ,
Resolvedly more leisure shall express :
All yet seems well ; and if it end so meet ,
The bitter past , more welcome is the sweet .

Spoken by the The king's a beggar , now the play is done :
All is well ended if this suit be won 
That you express content ; which we will pay ,
With strife to please you , day exceeding day :
Ours be your patience then , and yours our parts ;
Your gentle hands lend us , and take our hearts .

AS YOU LIKE IT

As I remember , Adam , it was upon this fashion bequeathed me by will but poor a thousand crowns , and , as thou sayest , charged my brother on his blessing , to breed me well : and there begins my sadness . My brother Jaques he keeps at school , and report speaks goldenly of his profit : for my part , he keeps me rustically at home , or , to speak more properly , stays me here at home unkept ; for call you that keeping for a gentleman of my birth , that differs not from the stalling of an ox ? His horses are bred better ; for , besides that they are fair with their feeding , they are taught their manage , and to that end riders dearly hired : but I , his brother , gain nothing under him but growth , for the which his animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him as I . Besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives me , the something that nature gave me , his countenance seems to take from me : he lets me feed with his hinds , bars me the place of a brother , and , as much as in him lies , mines my gentility with my education . This is it , Adam , that grieves me ; and the spirit of my father , which I think is within me , begins to mutiny against this servitude . I will no longer endure it , though yet I know no wise remedy how to avoid it .

Yonder comes my master , your brother .

Go apart , Adam , and thou shalt hear how he will shake me up .


Now , sir ! what make you here ?

Nothing : I am not taught to make anything .

What mar you then , sir ?

Marry , sir , I am helping you to mar that which God made , a poor unworthy brother of yours , with idleness .

Marry , sir , be better employed , and be naught awhile .

Shall I keep your hogs , and eat husks with them ? What prodigal portion have I spent , that I should come to such penury ?

Know you where you are , sir ?

O ! sir , very well : here in your orchard .

Know you before whom , sir ?

Ay , better than he I am before knows me . I know you are my eldest brother ; and , in the gentle condition of blood , you should so know me . The courtesy of nations allows you my better , in that you are the first-born ; but the same tradition takes not away my blood , were there twenty brothers betwixt us . I have as much of my father in me as you ; albeit , I confess , your coming before me is nearer to his reverence .

What , boy !

Come , come , elder brother , you are too young in this .

Wilt thou lay hands on me , villain ?

I am no villain ; I am the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys ; he was my father , and he is thrice a villain that says such a father begot villains . Wert thou not my brother , I would not take this hand from thy throat till this other had pulled out thy tongue for saying so : thou hast railed on thyself .

Sweet masters , be patient : for your father's remembrance , be at accord .

Let me go , I say .

I will not , till I please : you shall hear me . My father charged you in his will to give me good education : you have trained me like a peasant , obscuring and hiding from me all gentleman-like qualities . The spirit of my father grows strong in me , and I will no longer endure it ; therefore allow me such exercises as may become a gentleman , or give me the poor allottery my father left me by testament ; with that I will go buy my fortunes .

And what wilt thou do ? beg , when that is spent ? Well , sir , get you in : I will not long be troubled with you ; you shall have some part of your will : I pray you , leave me .

I will no further offend you than becomes me for my good .

Get you with him , you old dog .

Is 'old dog' my reward ? Most true , I have lost my teeth in your service . God be with my old master ! he would not have spoke such a word .


Is it even so ? begin you to grow upon me ? I will physic your rankness , and yet give no thousand crowns neither . Holla , Dennis !


Calls your worship ?

Was not Charles the duke's wrestler here to speak with me ?

So please you , he is here at the door , and importunes access to you .

Call him in .

'Twill be a good way ; and to-morrow the wrestling is .


Good morrow to your worship .

Good Monsieur Charles , what's the new news at the new court ?

There's no news at the court , sir , but the old news : that is , the old duke is banished by his younger brother the new duke ; and three or four loving lords have put themselves into voluntary exile with him , whose lands and revenues enrich the new duke ; therefore he gives them good leave to wander .

Can you tell if Rosalind , the duke's daughter , be banished with her father ?

O , no ; for the duke's daughter , her cousin , so loves her ,being ever from their cradles bred together ,that she would have followed her exile , or have died to stay behind her . She is at the court , and no less beloved of her uncle than his own daughter ; and never two ladies loved as they do .

Where will the old duke live ?

They say he is already in the forest of Arden , and a many merry men with him ; and there they live like the old Robin Hood of England . They say many young gentlemen flock to him every day , and fleet the time carelessly , as they did in the golden world .

What , you wrestle to-morrow before the new duke ?

Marry , do I , sir ; and I came to acquaint you with a matter . I am given , sir , secretly to understand that your younger brother Orlando hath a disposition to come in disguised against me to try a fall . To-morrow , sir , I wrestle for my credit , and he that escapes me without some broken limb shall acquit him well . Your brother is but young and tender ; and , for your love , I would be loath to foil him as I must , for my own honour , if he come in : therefore , out of my love to you , I came hither to acquaint you withal , that either you might stay him from his intendment , or brook such disgrace well as he shall run into , in that it is a thing of his own search and altogether against my will .

Charles , I thank thee for thy love to me , which thou shalt find I will most kindly requite . I had myself notice of my brother's purpose herein , and have by underhand means laboured to dissuade him from it , but he is resolute . I'll tell thee , Charles , it is the stubbornest young fellow of France ; full of ambition , an envious emulator of every man's good parts , a secret and villanous contriver against me his natural brother : therefore use thy discretion . I had as lief thou didst break his neck as his finger . And thou wert best look to't ; for if thou dost him any slight disgrace , or if he do not mightily grace himself on thee , he will practise against thee by poison , entrap thee by some treacherous device , and never leave thee till he hath ta'en thy life by some indirect means or other ; for , I assure thee ,and almost with tears I speak it ,there is not one so young and so villanous this day living . I speak but brotherly of him ; but should I anatomize him to thee as he is , I must blush and weep , and thou must look pale and wonder .

I am heartily glad I came hither to you . If he come to-morrow , I'll give him his payment : if ever he go alone again , I'll never wrestle for prize more ; and so God keep your worship !


Farewell , good Charles . Now will I stir this gamester . I hope I shall see an end of him ; for my soul , yet I know not why , hates nothing more than he . Yet he's gentle , never schooled and yet learned , full of noble device , of all sorts enchantingly beloved , and , indeed so much in the heart of the world , and especially of my own people , who best know him , that I am altogether misprised . But it shall not be so long ; this wrestler shall clear all : nothing remains but that I kindle the boy thither , which now I'll go about .

I pray thee , Rosalind , sweet my coz , be merry .

Dear Celia , I show more mirth than I am mistress of , and would you yet I were merrier ? Unless you could teach me to forget a banished father , you must not learn me how to remember any extraordinary pleasure .

Herein I see thou lovest me not with the full weight that I love thee . If my uncle , thy banished father , had banished thy uncle , the duke my father , so thou hadst been still with me , I could have taught my love to take thy father for mine : so wouldst thou , if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously tempered as mine is to thee .

Well , I will forget the condition of my estate , to rejoice in yours .

You know my father hath no child but I , nor none is like to have ; and , truly , when he dies , thou shalt be his heir : for what he hath taken away from thy father perforce , I will render thee again in affection ; by mine honour , I will ; and when I break that oath , let me turn monster . Therefore , my sweet Rose , my dear Rose , be merry .

From henceforth I will , coz , and devise sports . Let me see ; what think you of falling in love ?

Marry , I prithee , do , to make sport withal : but love no man in good earnest ; nor no further in sport neither , than with safety of a pure blush thou mayst in honour come off again .

What shall be our sport then ?

Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune from her wheel , that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally .

I would we could do so , for her benefits are mightily misplaced , and the bountiful blind woman doth most mistake in her gifts to women .

'Tis true ; for those that she makes fair she scarce makes honest , and those that she makes honest she makes very ill-favouredly .

Nay , now thou goest from Fortune's office to Nature's : Fortune reigns in gifts of the world , not in the lineaments of Nature .


No ? when Nature hath made a fair creature , may she not by Fortune fall into the fire ? Though Nature hath given us wit to flout at Fortune , hath not Fortune sent in this fool to cut off the argument ?

Indeed , there is Fortune too hard for Nature , when Fortune makes Nature's natural the cutter-off of Nature's wit .

Peradventure this is not Fortune's work neither , but Nature's ; who , perceiving our natural wits too dull to reason of such goddesses , hath sent this natural for our whetstone : for always the dulness of the fool is the whetstone of the wits . How now , wit ! whither wander you ?

Mistress , you must come away to your father .

Were you made the messenger ?

No , by mine honour ; but I was bid to come for you .

Where learned you that oath , fool ?

Of a certain knight that swore by his honour they were good pancakes , and swore by his honour the mustard was naught : now , I'll stand to it , the pancakes were naught and the mustard was good , and yet was not the knight forsworn .

How prove you that , in the great heap of your knowledge ?

Ay , marry : now unmuzzle your wisdom .

Stand you both forth now : stroke your chins , and swear by your beards that I am a knave .

By our beards , if we had them , thou art .

By my knavery , if I had it , then I were ; but if you swear by that that is not , you are not forsworn : no more was this knight , swearing by his honour , for he never had any ; or if he had , he had sworn it away before ever he saw those pancakes or that mustard .

Prithee , who is't that thou meanest ?

One that old Frederick , your father , loves .

My father's love is enough to honour him . Enough ! speak no more of him ; you'll be whipped for taxation one of these days .

The more pity , that fools may not speak wisely what wise men do foolishly .

By my troth , thou sayest true ; for since the little wit that fools have was silenced , the little foolery that wise men have makes a great show . Here comes Monsieur Le Beau .

With his mouth full of news .

Which he will put on us , as pigeons feed their young .

Then we shall be news-cramm'd .

All the better ; we shall be more marketable .

Bon jour , Monsieur Le Beau : what's the news ?

Fair princess , you have lost much good sport .

Sport ! Of what colour ?

What colour , madam ! How shall 
I answer you ?

As wit and fortune will .

Or as the Destinies decree .

Well said : that was laid on with a trowel .

Nay , if I keep not my rank ,

Thou losest thy old smell .

You amaze me , ladies : I would have told you of good wrestling , which you have lost the sight of .

Yet tell us the manner of the wrestling .

I will tell you the beginning ; and , if it please your ladyships , you may see the end , for the best is yet to do ; and here , where you are , they are coming to perform it .

Well , the beginning , that is dead and buried .

There comes an old man and his three sons ,

I could match this beginning with an old tale .

Three proper young men , of excellent growth and presence ;

With bills on their necks , 'Be it known unto all men by these presents .' 

The eldest of the three wrestled with Charles , the duke's wrestler ; which Charles in a moment threw him and broke three of his ribs , that there is little hope of life in him : so he served the second , and so the third . Yonder they lie ; the poor old man , their father , making such pitiful dole over them that all the beholders take his part with weeping .

Alas !

But what is the sport , monsieur , that the ladies have lost ?

Why , this that I speak of .

Thus men may grow wiser every day : it is the first time that ever I heard breaking of ribs was sport for ladies .

Or I , I promise thee .

But is there any else longs to feel this broken music in his sides ? is there yet another dotes upon rib-breaking ? Shall we see this wrestling , cousin ?

You must , if you stay here ; for here is the place appointed for the wrestling , and they are ready to perform it .

Yonder , sure , they are coming : let us now stay and see it .


Come on : since the youth will not be entreated , his own peril on his forwardness .

Is yonder the man ?

Even he , madam .

Alas ! he is too young : yet he looks successfully .

How now , daughter and cousin ! are you crept hither to see the wrestling ?

Ay , my liege , so please you give us leave .

You will take little delight in it , I can tell you , there is such odds in the man : in pity of the challenger's youth I would fam dissuade him , but he will not be entreated . Speak to him , ladies ; see if you can move him .

Call him hither , good Monsieur le Beau .

Do so : I'll not be by .


Monsieur the challenger , the princes call for you .

I attend them with all respect and duty .

Young man , have you challenged Charles the wrestler ?

No , fair princess ; he is the general challenger : I come but in , as others do , to try with him the strength of my youth .

Young gentleman , your spirits are too bold for your years . You have seen cruel proof of this man's strength : if you saw yourself with your eyes or knew yourself with your judgment , the fear of your adventure would counsel you to a more equal enterprise . We pray you , for your own sake , to embrace your own safety and give over this attempt .

Do , young sir : your reputation shall not therefore be misprised . We will make it our suit to the duke that the wrestling might not go forward .

I beseech you , punish me not with your hard thoughts , wherein I confess me much guilty , to deny so fair and excellent ladies anything . But let your fair eyes and gentle wishes go with me to my trial : wherein if I be foiled , there is but one shamed that was never gracious ; if killed , but one dead that is willing to be so . I shall do my friends no wrong , for I have none to lament me ; the world no injury , for in it I have nothing ; only in the world I fill up a place , which may be better supplied when I have made it empty .

The little strength that I have , I would it were with you .

And mine , to eke out hers .

Fare you well . Pray heaven I be deceived in you !

Your heart's desires be with you !

Come , where is this young gallant that is so desirous to lie with his mother earth ?

Ready , sir ; but his will hath in it a more modest working .

You shall try but one fall .

No , I warrant your Grace , you shall not entreat him to a second , that have so mightily persuaded him from a first .

You mean to mock me after ; you should not have mocked me before : but come your ways .

Now Hercules be thy speed , young man !

I would I were invisible , to catch the strong fellow by the leg .


O excellent young man !

If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye , I can tell who should down .


No more , no more .

Yes , I beseech your Grace : I am not yet well breathed .

How dost thou , Charles ?

He cannot speak , my lord .

Bear him away . What is thy name , young man ?


Orlando , my liege ; the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys .

I would thou hadst been son to some man else :
The world esteem'd thy father honourable ,
But I did find him still mine enemy :
Thou shouldst have better pleas'd me with this deed ,
Hadst thou descended from another house .
But fare thee well ; thou art a gallant youth :
I would thou hadst told me of another father .


Were I my father , coz , would I do this ?

I am more proud to be Sir Rowland's son ,
His youngest son ; and would not change that calling ,
To be adopted heir to Frederick .

My father lov'd Sir Rowland as his soul ,
And all the world was of my father's mind :
Had I before known this young man his son ,
I should have given him tears unto entreaties ,
Ere he should thus have ventur'd .

Gentle cousin ,
Let us go thank him and encourage him :
My father's rough and envious disposition 
Sticks me at heart . Sir , you have well deserv'd :
If you do keep your promises in love 
But justly , as you have exceeded all promise ,
Your mistress shall be happy .

Gentleman ,

Wear this for me , one out of suits with fortune ,
That could give more , but that her hand lacks means .
Shall we go , coz ?

Ay . Fare you well , fair gentleman .

Can I not say , I thank you ? My better parts 
Are all thrown down , and that which here stands up 
Is but a quintain , a mere lifeless block .

He calls us back : my pride fell with my fortunes ;
I'll ask him what he would . Did you call , sir ?
Sir , you have wrestled well , and overthrown 
More than your enemies .

Will you go , coz ?

Have with you . Fare you well .


What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue ?
I cannot speak to her , yet she urg'd conference .
O poor Orlando , thou art overthrown !
Or Charles or something weaker masters thee .


Good sir , I do in friendship counsel you 
To leave this place . Albeit you have deserv'd 
High commendation , true applause and love ,
Yet such is now the duke's condition 
That he misconstrues all that you have done .
The duke is humorous : what he is indeed ,
More suits you to conceive than I to speak of .

I thank you , sir ; and pray you , tell me this ;
Which of the two was daughter of the duke ,
That here was at the wrestling ?

Neither his daughter , if we judge by manners :
But yet , indeed the smaller is his daughter :
The other is daughter to the banish'd duke ,
And here detain'd by her usurping uncle ,
To keep his daughter company ; whose loves 
Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters .
But I can tell you that of late this duke 
Hath ta'en displeasure 'gainst his gentle niece ,
Grounded upon no other argument 
But that the people praise her for her virtues ,
And pity her for her good father's sake ;
And , on my life , his malice 'gainst the lady 
Will suddenly break forth . Sir , fare you well :
Hereafter , in a better world than this ,
I shall desire more love and knowledge of you .

I rest much bounden to you : fare you well .

Thus must I from the smoke into the smother ;
From tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother .
But heavenly Rosalind !


Why , cousin ! why , Rosalind ! Cupid have mercy ! Not a word ?

Not one to throw at a dog .

No , thy words are too precious to be cast away upon curs ; throw some of them at me ; come , lame me with reasons .

Then there were two cousins laid up ; when the one should be lamed with reasons and the other mad without any .

But is all this for your father ?

No , some of it is for my child's father :
O , how full of briers is this working-day world !

They are but burrs , cousin , thrown upon thee in holiday foolery : if we walk not in the trodden paths , our very petticoats will catch them .

I could shake them off my coat : these burrs are in my heart .

Hem them away .

I would try , if I could cry 'hem ,' and have him .

Come , come ; wrestle with thy affections .

O ! they take the part of a better wrestler than myself !

O , a good wish upon you ! you will try in time , in despite of a fall . But , turning these jests out of service , let us talk in good earnest : is it possible , on such a sudden , you should fall into so strong a liking with old Sir Rowland's youngest son ?

The duke my father loved his father dearly .

Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son dearly ? By this kind of chase , I should hate him , for my father hated his father dearly ; yet I hate not Orlando .

No , faith , hate him not , for my sake .

Why should I not ? doth he not deserve well ?

Let me love him for that ; and do you love him , because I do . Look , here comes the duke .

With his eyes full of anger .


Mistress , dispatch you with your safest haste ,
And get you from our court .

Me , uncle ?

You , cousin :
Within these ten days if that thou be'st found 
So near our public court as twenty miles ,
Thou diest for it .

I do beseech your Grace ,
Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me .
If with myself I hold intelligence ,
Or have acquaintance with mine own desires ,
If that I do not dream or be not frantic ,
As I do trust I am not ,then , dear uncle ,
Never so much as in a thought unborn 
Did I offend your highness .

Thus do all traitors :
If their purgation did consist in words ,
They are as innocent as grace itself :
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not .

Yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor :
Tell me whereon the likelihood depends .

Thou art thy father's daughter ; there's enough .

So was I when your highness took his dukedom ;
So was I when your highness banish'd him .
Treason is not inherited , my lord ;
Or , if we did derive it from our friends ,
What's that to me ? my father was no traitor :
Then , good my liege , mistake me not so much 
To think my poverty is treacherous .

Dear sovereign , hear me speak .

Ay , Celia ; we stay'd her for your sake ;
Else had she with her father rang'd along .

I did not then entreat to have her stay :
It was your pleasure and your own remorse .
I was too young that time to value her ;
But now I know her : if she be a traitor ,
Why so am I ; we still have slept together ,
Rose at an instant , learn'd , play'd , eat together ;
And wheresoe'er we went , like Juno's swans ,
Still we went coupled and inseparable .

She is too subtle for thee ; and her smoothness ,
Her very silence and her patience ,
Speak to the people , and they pity her .
Thou art a fool : she robs thee of thy name ;
And thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous 
When she is gone . Then open not thy lips :
Firm and irrevocable is my doom 
Which I have pass'd upon her ; she is banish'd .

Pronounce that sentence then , on me , my liege :
I cannot live out of her company .

You are a fool . You , niece , provide yourself :
If you outstay the time , upon mine honour ,
And in the greatness of my word , you die .


O my poor Rosalind ! whither wilt thou go ?
Wilt thou change fathers ? I will give thee mine .
I charge thee , be not thou more griev'd than I am .

I have more cause .

Thou hast not , cousin ;
Prithee , be cheerful ; know'st thou not , the duke 
Hath banish'd me , his daughter ?

That he hath not .

No , hath not ? Rosalind lacks then the love 
Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one :
Shall we be sunder'd ? shall we part , sweet girl ?
No : let my father seek another heir .
Therefore devise with me how we may fly ,
Whither to go , and what to bear with us :
And do not seek to take your change upon you ,
To bear your griefs yourself and leave me out ;
For , by this heaven , now at our sorrows pale ,
Say what thou canst , I'll go along with thee .

Why , whither shall we go ?

To seek my uncle in the forest of Arden .

Alas , what danger will it be to us ,
Maids as we are , to travel forth so far !
Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold .

I'll put myself in poor and mean attire ,
And with a kind of umber smirch my face ;
The like do you : so shall we pass along 
And never stir assailants .

Were it not better ,
Because that I am more than common tall ,
That I did suit me all points like a man ?
A gallant curtle-axe upon my thigh ,
A boar-spear in my hand ; and ,in my heart 
Lie there what hidden woman's fear there will ,
We'll have a swashing and a martial outside ,
As many other mannish cowards have 
That do outface it with their semblances .

What shall I call thee when thou art a man ?

I'll have no worse a name than Jove's own page ,
And therefore look you call me Ganymede .
But what will you be call'd ?

Something that hath a reference to my state :
No longer Celia , but Aliena .

But , cousin , what if we assay'd to steal 
The clownish fool out of your father's court ?
Would he not be a comfort to our travel ?

He'll go along o'er the wide world with me ;
Leave me alone to woo him . Let's away ,
And get our jewels and our wealth together ,
Devise the fittest time and safest way 
To hide us from pursuit that will be made 
After my flight . Now go we in content 
To liberty and not to banishment .

Now , my co-mates and brothers in exile ,
Hath not old custom made this life more sweet 
Than that of painted pomp ? Are not these woods 
More free from peril than the envious court ?
Here feel we but the penalty of Adam ,
The seasons' difference ; as , the icy fang 
And churlish chiding of the winter's wind ,
Which , when it bites and blows upon my body ,
Even till I shrink with cold , I smile and say 
'This is no flattery : these are counsellors 
That feelingly persuade me what I am .' 
Sweet are the uses of adversity ,
Which like the toad , ugly and venomous ,
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head ;
And this our life exempt from public haunt ,
Finds tongues in trees , books in the running brooks ,
Sermons in stones , and good in every thing .
I would not change it .

Happy is your Grace ,
That can translate the stubbornness of fortune 
Into so quiet and so sweet a style .

Come , shall we go and kill us venison ?
And yet it irks me , the poor dappled fools ,
Being native burghers of this desert city ,
Should in their own confines with forked heads 
Have their round haunches gor'd .

Indeed , my lord ,
The melancholy Jaques grieves at that ;
And , in that kind , swears you do more usurp 
Than doth your brother that hath banish'd you .
To-day my Lord of Amiens and myself 
Did steal behind him as he lay along 
Under an oak whose antique root peeps out 
Upon the brook that brawls along this wood ;
To the which place a poor sequester'd stag ,
That from the hunters' aim had ta'en a hurt ,
Did come to languish ; and , indeed , my lord ,
The wretched animal heav'd forth such groans 
That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat 
Almost to bursting , and the big round tears 
Cours'd one another down his innocent nose 
In piteous chase ; and thus the hairy fool ,
Much marked of the melancholy Jaques ,
Stood on the extremest verge of the swift brook ,
Augmenting it with tears .

But what said Jaques ?
Did he not moralize this spectacle ?

O , yes , into a thousand similes .
First , for his weeping into the needless stream ;
'Poor deer ,' quoth he , 'thou mak'st a testament 
As worldlings do , giving thy sum of more 
To that which had too much :' then , being there alone ,
Left and abandon'd of his velvet friends ;
''Tis right ,' quoth he ; 'thus misery doth part 
The flux of company :' anon , a careless herd ,
Full of the pasture , jumps along by him 
And never stays to greet him ; 'Ay ,' quoth Jaques ,
'Sweep on , you fat and greasy citizens ;
'Tis just the fashion ; wherefore do you look 
Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there ?' 
Thus most invectively he pierceth through 
The body of the country , city , court ,
Yea , and of this our life ; swearing that we 
Are mere usurpers , tyrants , and what's worse ,
To fright the animals and to kill them up 
In their assign'd and native dwelling-place .

And did you leave him in this contemplation ?

We did , my lord , weeping and commenting 
Upon the sobbing deer .

Show me the place .
I love to cope him in these sullen fits ,
For then he's full of matter .

I'll bring you to him straight .


Can it be possible that no man saw them ?
It cannot be : some villains of my court 
Are of consent and sufferance in this .

I cannot hear of any that did see her .
The ladies , her attendants of her chamber ,
Saw her a-bed ; and , in the morning early 
They found the bed untreasur'd of their mistress .

My lord , the roynish clown , at whom so oft 
Your Grace was wont to laugh , is also missing .
Hisperia , the princess' gentlewoman ,
Confesses that she secretly o'erheard 
Your daughter and her cousin much commend 
The parts and graces of the wrestler 
That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles ;
And she believes , wherever they are gone ,
That youth is surely in their company .

Send to his brother ; fetch that gallant hither ;
If he be absent , bring his brother to me ;
I'll make him find him . Do this suddenly ,
And let not search and inquisition quail 
To bring again these foolish runaways .


Who's there ?

What ! my young master ? O my gentle master !
O my sweet master ! O you memory 
Of old Sir Rowland ! why , what make you here ?
Why are you virtuous ? Why do people love you ?
And wherefore are you gentle , strong , and valiant ?
Why would you be so fond to overcome 
The bony priser of the humorous duke ?
Your praise is come too swiftly home before you .
Know you not , master , to some kind of men 
Their graces serve them but as enemies ?
No more do yours : your virtues , gentle master ,
Are sanctified and holy traitors to you .
O , what a world is this , when what is comely 
Envenoms him that bears it !

Why , what's the matter ?

O unhappy youth !
Come not within these doors ; within this roof 
The enemy of all your graces lives .
Your brother ,no , no brother ; yet the son ,
Yet not the son , I will not call him son 
Of him I was about to call his father ,
Hath heard your praises , and this night he means 
To burn the lodging where you use to lie ,
And you within it : if he fail of that ,
He will have other means to cut you off .
I overheard him and his practices .
This is no place ; this house is but a butchery :
Abhor it , fear it , do not enter it .

Why , whither , Adam , wouldst thou have me go ?

No matter whither , so you come not here .

What ! wouldst thou have me go and beg my food ?
Or with a base and boisterous sword enforce 
A thievish living on the common road ?
This I must do , or know not what to do :
Yet this I will not do , do how I can ;
I rather will subject me to the malice 
Of a diverted blood and bloody brother .

But do not so . I have five hundred crowns ,
The thrifty hire I sav'd under your father ,
Which I did store to be my foster-nurse 
When service should in my old limbs lie lame ,
And unregarded age in corners thrown .
Take that ; and He that doth the ravens feed ,
Yea , providently caters for the sparrow ,
Be comfort to my age ! Here is the gold ;
All this I give you . Let me be your servant :
Though I look old , yet I am strong and lusty ;
For in my youth I never did apply 
Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood ,
Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo 
The means of weakness and debility ;
Therefore my age is as a lusty winter ,
Frosty , but kindly . Let me go with you ;
I'll do the service of a younger man 
In all your business and necessities .

O good old man ! how well in thee appears 
The constant service of the antique world ,
When service sweat for duty , not for meed !
Thou art not for the fashion of these times ,
Where none will sweat but for promotion ,
And having that , do choke their service up 
Even with the having : it is not so with thee .
But , poor old man , thou prun'st a rotten tree ,
That cannot so much as a blossom yield ,
In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry .
But come thy ways , we'll go along together ,
And ere we have thy youthful wages spent ,
We'll light upon some settled low content .

Master , go on , and I will follow thee 
To the last gasp with truth and loyalty .
From seventeen years till now almost fourscore 
Here lived I , but now live here no more .
At seventeen years many their fortunes seek ;
But at fourscore it is too late a week :
Yet fortune cannot recompense me better 
Than to die well and not my master's debtor .


O Jupiter ! how weary are my spirits .

I care not for my spirits if my legs were not weary .

I could find it in my heart to disgrace my man's apparel and to cry like a woman ; but I must comfort the weaker vessel , as doublet and hose ought to show itself courageous to petticoat : therefore , courage , good Aliena .

I pray you , bear with me : I cannot go no further .

For my part , I had rather bear with you than bear you ; yet I should bear no cross if I did bear you , for I think you have no money in your purse .

Well , this is the forest of Arden .

Ay , now am I in Arden ; the more fool I : when I was at home , I was in a better place : but travellers must be content .

Ay , be so , good Touchstone . Look you , who comes here ; a young man and an old in solemn talk .


That is the way to make her scorn you still .

O Corin , that thou knew'st how I do love her !

I partly guess , for I have lov'd ere now .

No , Corin ; being old , thou canst not guess ,
Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover 
As ever sigh'd upon a midnight pillow :
But if thy love were ever like to mine ,
As sure I think did never man love so ,
How many actions most ridiculous 
Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy ?

Into a thousand that I have forgotten .

O ! thou didst then ne'er love so heartily .
If thou remember'st not the slightest folly 
That ever love did make thee run into ,
Thou hast not lov'd :
Or if thou hast not sat as I do now ,
Wearing thy hearer with thy mistress' praise ,
Thou hast not lov'd :
Or if thou hast not broke from company 
Abruptly , as my passion now makes me ,
Thou hast not lov'd . O Phebe , Phebe , Phebe !


Alas , poor shepherd ! searching of thy wound ,
I have by hard adventure found mine own .

And I mine . I remember , when I was in love I broke my sword upon a stone , and bid him take that for coming a-night to Jane Smile ; and I remember the kissing of her batler , and the cow's dugs that her pretty chopped hands had milked ; and I remember the wooing of a peascod instead of her , from whom I took two cods , and giving her them again , said with weeping tears , 'Wear these for my sake .' We that are true lovers run into strange capers ; but as all is mortal in nature , so is all nature in love mortal in folly .

Thou speakest wiser than thou art ware of .

Nay , I shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit till I break my shins against it .

Jove , Jove ! this shepherd's passion 
Is much upon my fashion .

And mine ; but it grows something stale with me .

I pray you , one of you question yond man ,
If he for gold will give us any food :
I faint almost to death .

Holla , you clown !

Peace , fool : he's not thy kinsman .

Who calls ?

Your betters , sir .

Else are they very wretched .

Peace , I say . Good even to you , friend .

And to you , gentle sir , and to you all .

I prithee , shepherd , if that love or gold 
Can in this desert place buy entertainment ,
Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed .
Here's a young maid with travel much oppress'd ,
And faints for succour .

Fair sir , I pity her ,
And wish , for her sake more than for mine own ,
My fortunes were more able to relieve her ;
But I am shepherd to another man ,
And do not shear the fleeces that I graze :
My master is of churlish disposition 
And little recks to find the way to heaven 
By doing deeds of hospitality .
Besides , his cote , his flocks , and bounds of feed 
Are now on sale ; and at our sheepcote now ,
By reason of his absence , there is nothing 
That you will feed on ; but what is , come see ,
And in my voice most welcome shall you be .

What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture ?

That young swain that you saw here but erewhile ,
That little cares for buying anything .

I pray thee , if it stand with honesty ,
Buy thou the cottage , pasture , and the flock ,
And thou shalt have to pay for it of us .

And we will mend thy wages . I like this place ,
And willingly could waste my time in it .

Assuredly the thing is to be sold :
Go with me : if you like upon report 
The soil , the profit , and this kind of life ,
I will your very faithful feeder be ,
And buy it with your gold right suddenly .


Under the greenwood tree 
Who loves to lie with me ,
And turn his merry note 
Unto the sweet bird's throat ,
Come hither , come hither , come hither :
Here shall he see 
No enemy 
But winter and rough weather .

More , more , I prithee , more .

It will make you melancholy , Monsieur Jaques .

I thank it . More ! I prithee , more . I can suck melancholy out of a song as a weasel sucks eggs . More ! I prithee , more .

My voice is ragged ; I know I cannot please you .

I do not desire you to please me ; I do desire you to sing . Come , more ; another stanzo : call you them stanzos ?

What you will , Monsieur Jaques .

Nay , I care not for their names ; they owe me nothing . Will you sing ?

More at your request than to please myself .

Well then , if ever I thank any man , I'll thank you : but that they call compliment is like the encounter of two dog-apes , and when a man thanks me heartily , methinks I have given him a penny and he renders me the beggarly thanks . Come , sing ; and you that will not , hold your tongues .

Well , I'll end the song . Sirs , cover the while ; the duke will drink under this tree . He hath been all this day to look you .

And I have been all this day to avoid him . He is too disputable for my company : I think of as many matters as he , but I give heaven thanks , and make no boast of them . Come , warble ; come .

Who doth ambition shun ,

And loves to live i' the sun ,
Secking the food he eats ,
And pleas'd with what he gets .
Come hither , come hither , come hither :
Here shall he see 
No enemy 
But winter and rough weather .

I'll give you a verse to this note , that I made yesterday in despite of my invention .

And I'll sing it .

Thus it goes :

If it do come to pass 
That any man turn ass ,
Leaving his wealth and ease ,
A stubborn will to please ,
Ducdame , ducdame , ducdame :
Here shall he see 
Gross fools as he ,
An if he will come to me .


What's that 'ducdame ?' 

'Tis a Greek invocation to call fools into a circle . I'll go sleep if I can ; if I cannot , I'll rail against all the first-born of Egypt .

And I'll go seek the duke : his banquet is prepared .


Dear master , I can go no further : O ! I die for food . Here lie I down , and measure out my grave . Farewell , kind master .

Why , how now , Adam ! no greater heart in thee ? Live a little ; comfort a little ; cheer thyself a little . If this uncouth forest yield anything savage , I will either be food for it , or bring it for food to thee . Thy conceit is nearer death than thy powers . For my sake be comfortable , hold death awhile at the arm's end , I will here be with thee presently , and if I bring thee not something to eat , I will give thee leave to die ; but if thou diest before I come , thou art a mocker of my labour . Well said ! thou lookest cheerly , and I'll be with thee quickly . Yet thou liest in the bleak air : come I will bear thee to some shelter , and thou shalt not die for lack of a dinner , if there live anything in this desert . Cheerly , good Adam .


I think he be transform'd into a beast ,
For I can nowhere find him like a man .

My lord , he is but even now gone hence :
Here was he merry , hearing of a song .

If he , compact of jars , grow musical ,
We shall have shortly discord in the spheres .
Go , seek him : tell him I would speak with him .

He saves my labour by his own approach .


Why , how now , monsieur ! what a life is this ,
That your poor friends must woo your company ?
What , you look merrily !

A fool , a fool ! I met a fool i' the forest ,
A motley fool ; a miserable world !
As I do live by food , I met a fool ;
Who laid him down and bask'd him in the sun ,
And rail'd on Lady Fortune in good terms ,
In good set terms , and yet a motley fool .
'Good morrow , fool ,' quoth I . 'No , sir ,' quoth he ,
'Call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortune .' 
And then he drew a dial from his poke ,
And , looking on it with lack-lustre eye ,
Says very wisely , 'It is ten o'clock ;
Thus may we see ,' quoth he , 'how the world wags :
'Tis but an hour ago since it was nine ,
And after one hour more 'twill be eleven ;
And so , from hour to hour we ripe and ripe ,
And then from hour to hour we rot and rot ,
And thereby hangs a tale .' When I did hear 
The motley fool thus moral on the time ,
My lungs began to crow like chanticleer ,
That fools should be so deep-contemplative ,
And I did laugh sans intermission 
An hour by his dial . O noble fool !
A worthy fool ! Motley's the only wear .

What fool is this ?

O worthy fool ! One that hath been a courtier ,
And says , if ladies be but young and fair ,
They have the gift to know it ; and in his brain ,
Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit 
After a voyage ,he hath strange places cramm'd 
With observation , the which he vents 
In mangled forms . O that I were a fool !
I am ambitious for a motley coat .

Thou shalt have one .

It is my only suit ;
Provided that you weed your better judgments 
Of all opinion that grows rank in them 
That I am wise . I must have liberty 
Withal , as large a charter as the wind ,
To blow on whom I please ; for so fools have :
And they that are most galled with my folly ,
They most must laugh . And why , sir , must they so ?
The 'why' is plain as way to parish church :
He that a fool doth very wisely hit 
Doth very foolishly , although he smart ,
Not to seem senseless of the bob ; if not ,
The wise man's folly is anatomiz'd 
Even by the squandering glances of the fool .
Invest me in my motley ; give me leave 
To speak my mind , and I will through and through 
Cleanse the foul body of th' infected world ,
If they will patiently receive my medicine .

Fie on thee ! I can tell what thou wouldst do .

What , for a counter , would I do , but good ?

Most mischievous foul sin , in chiding sin :
For thou thyself hast been a libertine ,
As sensual as the brutish sting itself ;
And all the embossed sores and headed evils ,
That thou with licence of free foot hast caught ,
Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world .

Why , who cries out on pride ,
That can therein tax any private party ?
Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea ,
Till that the weary very means do ebb ?
What woman in the city do I name ,
When that I say the city-woman bears 
The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders ?
Who can come in and say that I mean her ,
When such a one as she such is her neighbour ?
Or what is he of basest function ,
That says his bravery is not on my cost ,
Thinking that I mean him ,but therein suits 
His folly to the mettle of my speech ?
There then ; how then ? what then ? Let me see wherein 
My tongue hath wrong'd him : if it do him right ,
Then he hath wrong'd himself ; if he be free ,
Why then , my taxing like a wild goose flies ,
Unclaim'd of any man . But who comes here ?


Forbear , and eat no more .

Why , I have eat none yet .

Nor shalt not , till necessity be serv'd .

Of what kind should this cock come of ?

Art thou thus bolden'd , man , by thy distress ,
Or else a rude despiser of good manners ,
That in civility thou seem'st so empty ?

You touch'd my vein at first : the thorny point 
Of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show 
Of smooth civility ; yet I am inland bred 
And know some nurture . But forbear , I say :
He dies that touches any of this fruit 
Till I and my affairs are answered .

An you will not be answered with reason ,
I must die .

What would you have ? Your gentleness shall force 
More than your force move us to gentleness .

I almost die for food ; and let me have it .

Sit down and feed , and welcome to our table .

Speak you so gently ? Pardon me , I pray you :
I thought that all things had been savage here ,
And therefore put I on the countenance 
Of stern commandment . But whate'er you are 
That in this desert inaccessible ,
Under the shade of melancholy boughs ,
Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time ;
If ever you have look'd on better days ,
If ever been where bells have knoll'd to church ,
If ever sat at any good man's feast ,
If ever from your eyelids wip'd a tear ,
And know what 'tis to pity , and be pitied ,
Let gentleness my strong enforcement be :
In the which hope I blush , and hide my sword .

True is it that we have seen better days ,
And have with holy bell been knoll'd to church ,
And sat at good men's feasts , and wip'd our eyes 
Of drops that sacred pity hath engender'd ;
And therefore sit you down in gentleness 
And take upon command what help we have 
That to your wanting may be minister'd .

Then but forbear your food a little while ,
Whiles , like a doe , I go to find my fawn 
And give it food . There is an old poor man ,
Who after me hath many a weary step 
Limp'd in pure love : till he be first suffic'd ,
Oppress'd with two weak evils , age and hunger ,
I will not touch a bit .

Go find him out ,
And we will nothing waste till you return .

I thank ye ; and be bless'd for your good comfort !


Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy :
This wide and universal theatre 
Presents more woful pageants than the scene 
Wherein we play in .

All the world's a stage ,
And all the men and women merely players :
They have their exits and their entrances ;
And one man in his time plays many parts ,
His acts being seven ages . At first the infant ,
Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms .
And then the whining school-boy , with his satchel ,
And shining morning face , creeping like snail 
Unwillingly to school . And then the lover ,
Sighing like furnace , with a woful ballad 
Made to his mistress' eyebrow . Then a soldier ,
Full of strange oaths , and bearded like the pard ,
Jealous in honour , sudden and quick in quarrel ,
Seeking the bubble reputation 
Even in the cannon's mouth . And then the justice ,
In fair round belly with good capon lin'd ,
With eyes severe , and beard of formal cut ,
Full of wise saws and modern instances ;
And so he plays his part . The sixth age shifts 
Into the lean and slipper'd pantaloon ,
With spectacles on nose and pouch on side ,
His youthful hose well sav'd , a world too wide 
For his shrunk shank ; and his big manly voice ,
Turning again toward childish treble , pipes 
And whistles in his sound . Last scene of all ,
That ends this strange eventful history ,
Is second childishness and mere oblivion ,
Sans teeth , sans eyes , sans taste , sans everything .


Welcome . Set down your venerable burden ,
And let him feed .

I thank you most for him .

So had you need :
I scarce can speak to thank you for myself .

Welcome ; fall to : I will not trouble you 
As yet , to question you about your fortunes .
Give us some music ; and , good cousin , sing .

Blow , blow , thou winter wind ,
Thou art not so unkind 
As man's ingratitude ;
Thy tooth is not so keen ,
Because thou art not seen ,
Although thy breath be rude .
Heigh-ho ! sing , heigh-ho ! unto the green holly :
Most friendship is feigning , most loving mere folly .
Then heigh-ho ! the holly !
This life is most jolly .
Freeze , freeze , thou bitter sky ,
That dost not bite so nigh 
As benefits forgot :
Though thou the waters warp ,
Thy sting is not so sharp 
As friend remember'd not .
Heigh-ho ! sing , heigh-ho ! unto the green holly :
Most friendship is feigning , most loving mere folly .
Then heigh-ho ! the holly !
This life is most jolly .

If that you were the good Sir Rowland's son ,
As you have whisper'd faithfully you were ,
And as mine eye doth his effigies witness 
Most truly limn'd and living in your face ,
Be truly welcome hither : I am the duke 
That lov'd your father : the residue of your fortune ,
Go to my cave and tell me . Good old man ,
Thou art right welcome as thy master is .
Support him by the arm . Give me your hand ,
And let me all your fortunes understand .

Not seen him since ! Sir , sir , that cannot be :
But were I not the better part made mercy ,
I should not seek an absent argument 
Of my revenge , thou present . But look to it :
Find out thy brother , wheresoe'er he is ;
Seek him with candle ; bring him , dead or living ,
Within this twelvemonth , or turn thou no more 
To seek a living in our territory .
Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine 
Worth seizure , do we seize into our hands ,
Till thou canst quit thee by thy brother's mouth 
Of what we think against thee .

O that your highness knew my heart in this !
I never lov'd my brother in my life .

More villain thou . Well , push him out of doors ;
And let my officers of such a nature 
Make an extent upon his house and lands .
Do this expediently and turn him going .


Hang there , my verse , in witness of my love :
And thou , thrice-crowned queen of night , survey 
With thy chaste eye , from thy pale sphere above ,
Thy huntress' name , that my full life doth sway .
O Rosalind ! these trees shall be my books ,
And in their barks my thoughts I'll character ,
That every eye , which in this forest looks ,
Shall see thy virtue witness'd everywhere .
Run , run , Orlando : carve on every tree 
The fair , the chaste , and unexpressive she .

And how like you this shepherd's life , Master Touchstone ?

Truly , shepherd , in respect of itself , it is a good life ; but in respect that it is a shepherd's life , it is naught . In respect that it is solitary , I like it very well ; but in respect that it is private , it is a very vile life . Now , in respect it is in the fields , it pleaseth me well ; but in respect it is not in the court , it is tedious . As it is a spare life , look you , it fits my humour well ; but as there is no more plenty in it , it goes much against my stomach . Hast any philosophy in thee , shepherd ?

No more but that I know the more one sickens the worse at ease he is ; and that he that wants money , means , and content , is without three good friends ; that the property of rain is to wet , and fire to burn ; that good pasture makes fat sheep , and that a great cause of the night is lack of the sun ; that he that hath learned no wit by nature nor art may complain of good breeding , or comes of a very dull kindred .

Such a one is a natural philosopher . Wast ever in court , shepherd ?

No , truly .

Then thou art damned .

Nay , I hope .

Truly , thou art damned like an ill-roasted egg , all on one side .

For not being at court ? Your reason .

Why , if thou never wast at court , thou never sawest good manners ; if thou never sawest good manners , then thy manners must be wicked ; and wickedness is sin , and sin is damnation . Thou art in a parlous state , shepherd .

Not a whit , Touchstone : those that are good manners at the court , are as ridiculous in the country as the behaviour of the country is most mockable at the court . You told me you salute not at the court , but you kiss your hands ; that courtesy would be uncleanly if courtiers were shepherds .

Instance , briefly ; come , instance .

Why , we are still handling our ewes , and their fells , you know , are greasy .

Why , do not your courtier's hands sweat ? and is not the grease of a mutton as wholesome as the sweat of a man ? Shallow , shallow . A better instance , I say ; come .

Besides , our hands are hard .

Your lips will feel them the sooner : shallow again . A more sounder instance ; come .

And they are often tarred over with the surgery of our sheep ; and would you have us kiss tar ? The courtier's hands are perfumed with civet .

Most shallow man ! Thou worms-meat , in respect of a good piece of flesh , indeed ! Learn of the wise , and perpend : civet is of a baser birth than tar , the very uncleanly flux of a cat . Mend the instance , shepherd .

You have too courtly a wit for me : I'll rest .

Wilt thou rest damned ? God help thee , shallow man ! God make incision in thee ! thou art raw .

Sir , I am a true labourer : I earn that I eat , get that I wear , owe no man hate , envy no man's happiness , glad of other men's good , content with my harm ; and the greatest of my pride is to see my ewes graze and my lambs suck .

That is another simple sin in you , to bring the ewes and the rams together , and to offer to get your living by the copulation of cattle ; to be bawd to a bell-wether , and to betray a she-lamb of a twelvemonth to a crooked-pated , old , cuckoldy ram , out of all reasonable match . If thou be'st not damned for this , the devil himself will have no shepherds : I cannot see else how thou shouldst 'scape .

Here comes young Master Ganymede , my new mistress's brother .

From the east to western Ind ,
No jewel is like Rosalind 
Her worth , being mounted on the wind ,
Through all the world bears Rosalind .
All the pictures fairest lin'd 
Are but black to Rosalind .
Let no face be kept in mind ,
But the fair of Rosalind .


I'll rime you so , eight years together , dinners and suppers and sleeping hours excepted : it is the right butter-women's rank to market .

Out , fool !

For a taste :

If a hart do lack a hind ,
Let him seek out Rosalind .
If the cat will after kind ,
So be sure will Rosalind .
Winter-garments must be lin'd ,
So must slender Rosalind .
They that reap must sheaf and bind ,
Then to cart with Rosalind .
Sweetest nut hath sourest rind ,
Such a nut is Rosalind .
He that sweetest rose will find 
Must find love's prick and Rosalind .

This is the very false gallop of verses : why do you infect yourself with them ?

Peace ! you dull fool : I found them on a tree .

Truly , the tree yields bad fruit .

I'll graff it with you , and then I shall graff it with a medlar : then it will be the earliest fruit i' the country ; for you'll be rotten ere you be half ripe , and that's the right virtue of the medlar .

You have said ; but whether wisely or no , let the forest judge .


Peace !
Here comes my sister , reading : stand aside .


Why should this a desert be ?
For it is unpeopled ? No ;
Tongues I'll hang on every tree ,
That shall civil sayings show .
Some , how brief the life of man 
Runs his erring pilgrimage ,
That the stretching of a span 
Buckles in his sum of age ;
Some , of violated vows 
'Twixt the souls of friend and friend :
But upon the fairest boughs ,
Or at every sentence' end ,
Will I Rosalinda write ;
Teaching all that read to know 
The quintessence of every sprite 
Heaven would in little show .
Therefore Heaven Nature charg'd 
That one body should be fill'd 
With all graces wide enlarg'd :
Nature presently distill'd 
Helen's cheek , but not her heart ,
Cleopatra's majesty ,
Atalanta's better part ,
Sad Lucretia's modesty .
Thus Rosalind of many parts 
By heavenly synod was devis'd 
Of many faces , eyes , and hearts ,
To have the touches dearest priz'd .
Heaven would that she these gifts should have ,
And I to live and die her slave .


O most gentle pulpiter ! what tedious homily of love have you wearied your parishioners withal , and never cried , 'Have patience , good people !' 

How now ! back , friends ! Shepherd , go off a little : go with him , sirrah .

Come , shepherd , let us make an honourable retreat ; though not with bag and baggage , yet with scrip and scrippage .


Didst thou hear these verses ?

O , yes , I heard them all , and more too ; for some of them had in them more feet than the verses would bear .

That's no matter : the feet might bear the verses .

Ay , but the feet were lame , and could not bear themselves without the verse , and therefore stood lamely in the verse .

But didst thou hear without wondering , how thy name should be hanged and carved upon these trees ?

I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder before you came ; for look here what I found on a palm-tree : I was never so be-rimed since Pythagoras' time , that I was an Irish rat , which I can hardly remember .

Trow you who hath done this ?

Is it a man ?

And a chain , that you once wore , about his neck . Change you colour ?

I prithee , who ?

O Lord , Lord ! it is a hard matter for friends to meet ; but mountains may be removed with earthquakes , and so encounter .

Nay , but who is it ?

Is it possible ?

Nay , I prithee now , with most petitionary vehemence , tell me who it is .

O wonderful , wonderful , and most wonderful wonderful ! and yet again wonderful ! and after that , out of all whooping !

Good my complexion ! dost thou think , though I am caparison'd like a man , I have a doublet and hose in my disposition ? One inch of delay more is a South-sea of discovery ; I prithee , tell me who is it quickly , and speak apace . I would thou couldst stammer , that thou mightst pour this concealed man out of thy mouth , as wine comes out of a narrow-mouth'd bottle ; either too much at once , or none at all . I prithee , take the cork out of thy mouth , that I may drink thy tidings .

So you may put a man in your belly .

Is he of God's making ? What manner of man ? Is his head worth a hat , or his chin worth a beard ?

Nay , he hath but a little beard .

Why , God will send more , if the man will be thankful . Let me stay the growth of his beard , if thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin .

It is young Orlando , that tripped up the wrestler's heels and your heart both , in an instant .

Nay , but the devil take mocking : speak , sad brow and true maid .

I' faith , coz , 'tis he .

Orlando ?

Orlando .

Alas the day ! what shall I do with my doublet and hose ? What did he when thou sawest him ? What said he ? How looked he ? Wherein went he ? What makes he here ? Did he ask for me ? Where remains he ? How parted he with thee , and when shalt thou see him again ? Answer me in one word .

You must borrow me Gargantua's mouth first : 'tis a word too great for any mouth of this age's size . To say ay and no to these particulars is more than to answer in a catechism .

But doth he know that I am in this forest and in man's apparel ? Looks he as freshly as he did the day he wrestled ?

It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the propositions of a lover ; but take a taste of my finding him , and relish it with good observance . I found him under a tree , like a dropped acorn .

It may well be called Jove's tree , when it drops forth such fruit .

Give me audience , good madam .

Proceed .

There lay he , stretch'd along like a wounded knight .

Though it be pity to see such a sight , it well becomes the ground .

Cry 'holla !' to thy tongue , I prithee ; it curvets unseasonably . He was furnish'd like a hunter .

O , ominous ! he comes to kill my heart .

I would sing my song without a burthen : thou bringest me out of tune .

Do you not know I am a woman ? when I think , I must speak . Sweet , say on .

You bring me out . Soft ! comes he not here ?

'Tis he : slink by , and note him .


I thank you for your company ; but , good faith , I had as lief have been myself alone .

And so had I ; but yet , for fashion' sake , I thank you too for your society .

God be wi' you : let's meet as little as we can .

I do desire we may be better strangers .

I pray you , mar no more trees with writing love-songs in their barks .

I pray you mar no more of my verses with reading them ill-favouredly .

Rosalind is your love's name ?

Yes , just .

I do not like her name .

There was no thought of pleasing you when she was christened .

What stature is she of ?

Just as high as my heart .

You are full of pretty answers . Have you not been acquainted with goldsmiths' wives , and conn'd them out of rings ?

Not so ; but I answer you right painted cloth , from whence you have studied your questions .

You have a nimble wit : I think 'twas made of Atalanta's heels . Will you sit down with me ? and we two will rail against our mistress the world , and all our misery .

I will chide no breather in the world but myself , against whom I know most faults .

The worst fault you have is to be in love .

'Tis a fault I will not change for your best virtue . I am weary of you .

By my troth , I was seeking for a fool when I found you .

He is drowned in the brook : look but in , and you shall see him .

There I shall see mine own figure .

Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher .

I'll tarry no longer with you . Farewell , good Signior Love .

I am glad of your departure . Adieu , good Monsieur Melancholy .


I will speak to him like a saucy lackey , and under that habit play the knave with him . Do you hear , forester ?

Very well : what would you ?

I pray you , what is't o'clock ?

You should ask me , what time o' day ; there's no clock in the forest .

Then there is no true lover in the forest ; else sighing every minute and groaning every hour would detect the lazy foot of Time as well as a clock .

And why not the swift foot of Time ? had not that been as proper ?

By no means , sir . Time travels in divers paces with divers persons . I'll tell you who Time ambles withal , who Time trots withal , who Time gallops withal , and who he stands still withal .

I prithee , who doth he trot withal ?

Marry , he trots hard with a young maid between the contract of her marriage and the day it is solemnized ; if the interim be but a se'nnight , Time's pace is so hard that it seems the length of seven year .

Who ambles Time withal ?

With a priest that lacks Latin , and a rich man that hath not the gout ; for the one sleeps easily because he cannot study , and the other lives merrily because he feels no pain ; the one lacking the burden of lean and wasteful learning , the other knowing no burden of heavy tedious penury . These Time ambles withal .

Who doth he gallop withal ?

With a thief to the gallows ; for though he go as softly as foot can fall he thinks himself too soon there .

Who stays it still withal ?

With lawyers in the vacation ; for they sleep between term and term , and then they perceive not how Time moves .

Where dwell you , pretty youth ?

With this shepherdess , my sister ; here in the skirts of the forest , like fringe upon a petticoat .

Are you native of this place ?

As the cony , that you see dwell where she is kindled .

Your accent is something finer than you could purchase in so removed a dwelling .

I have been told so of many : but indeed an old religious uncle of mine taught me to speak , who was in his youth an inland man ; one that knew courtship too well , for there he fell in love . I have heard him read many lectures against it ; and I thank God , I am not a woman , to be touched with so many giddy offences as he hath generally taxed their whole sex withal .

Can you remember any of the principal evils that he laid to the charge of women ?

There were none principal ; they were all like one another as half-pence are ; every one fault seeming monstrous till his fellow fault came to match it .

I prithee , recount some of them .

No , I will not cast away my physic , but on those that are sick . There is a man haunts the forest , that abuses our young plants with carving 'Rosalind' on their barks ; hangs odes upon hawthorns , and elegies on brambles ; all , forsooth , deifying the name of Rosalind : if I could meet that fancy-monger , I would give him some good counsel , for he seems to have the quotidian of love upon him .

I am he that is so love-shaked . I pray you , tell me your remedy .

There is none of my uncle's marks upon you : he taught me how to know a man in love ; in which cage of rushes I am sure you are not prisoner .

What were his marks ?

A lean cheek , which you have not ; a blue eye and sunken , which you have not ; an unquestionable spirit , which you have not ; a beard neglected , which you have not : but I pardon you for that , for , simply , your having in beard is a younger brother's revenue . Then , your hose should be ungartered , your bonnet unbanded , your sleeve unbuttoned , your shoe untied , and everything about you demonstrating a careless desolation . But you are no such man : you are rather point-device in your accoutrements ; as loving yourself than seeming the lover of any other .

Fair youth , I would I could make thee believe I love .

Me believe it ! you may as soon make her that you love believe it ; which , I warrant , she is apter to do than to confess she does ; that is one of the points in the which women still give the lie to their consciences . But , in good sooth , are you he that hangs the verses on the trees , wherein Rosalind is so admired ?

I swear to thee , youth , by the white hand of Rosalind , I am that he , that unfortunate he .

But are you so much in love as your rimes speak ?

Neither rime nor reason can express how much .

Love is merely a madness , and , I tell you , deserves as well a dark house and a whip as madmen do ; and the reason why they are not so punished and cured is , that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippers are in love too . Yet I profess curing it by counsel .

Did you ever cure any so ?

Yes , one ; and in this manner . He was to imagine me his love , his mistress ; and I set him every day to woo me : at which time would I , being but a moonish youth , grieve , be effeminate , changeable , longing and liking ; proud , fantastical , apish , shallow , inconstant , full of tears , full of smiles , for every passion something , and for no passion truly anything , as boys and women are , for the most part , cattle of this colour ; would now like him , now loathe him ; then entertain him , then forswear him ; now weep for him , then spit at him ; that I drave my suitor from his mad humour of love to a living humour of madness , which was , to forswear the full stream of the world , and to live in a nook merely monastic . And thus I cured him ; and this way will I take upon me to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheep's heart , that there shall not be one spot of love in't .

I would not be cured , youth .

I would cure you , if you would but call me Rosalind , and come every day to my cote and woo me .

Now , by the faith of my love , I will : tell me where it is .

Go with me to it and I'll show it you ; and by the way you shall tell me where in the forest you live . Will you go ?

With all my heart , good youth .

Nay , you must call me Rosalind . Come , sister , will you go ?


Come apace , good Audrey : I will fetch up your goats , Audrey . And how , Audrey ? am I the man yet ? doth my simple feature content you ?

Your features ! Lord warrant us ! what features ?

I am here with thee and thy goats , as the most capricious poet , honest Ovid , was among the Goths .

O knowledge ill-inhabited , worse than Jove in a thatch'd house !

When a man's verses cannot be understood , nor a man's good wit seconded with the forward child Understanding , it strikes a man more dead than a great reckoning in a little room . Truly , I would the gods had made thee poetical .

I do not know what 'poetical' is . Is it honest in deed and word ? Is it a true thing ?

No , truly , for the truest poetry is the most feigning ; and lovers are given to poetry , and what they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do feign .

Do you wish then that the gods had made me poetical ?

I do , truly ; for thou swearest to me thou art honest : now , if thou wert a poet , I might have some hope thou didst feign .

Would you not have me honest ?

No , truly , unless thou wert hard-favour'd ; for honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar .

A material fool .

Well , I am not fair , and therefore I pray the gods make me honest .

Truly , and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut were to put good meat into an unclean dish .

I am not a slut , though I thank the gods I am foul .

Well , praised be the gods for thy foulness ! sluttishness may come hereafter . But be it as it may be , I will marry thee ; and to that end I have been with Sir Oliver Martext , the vicar of the next village , who hath promised to meet me in this place of the forest , and to couple us .

I would fain see this meeting .

Well , the gods give us joy !

Amen . A man may , if he were of a fearful heart , stagger in this attempt ; for here we have no temple but the wood , no assembly but horn-beasts . But what though ? Courage ! As horns are odious , they are necessary . It is said , 'many a man knows no end of his goods :' right ; many a man has good horns , and knows no end of them . Well , that is the dowry of his wife ; 'tis none of his own getting . Horns ? Even so . Poor men alone ? No , no ; the noblest deer hath them as huge as the rascal . Is the single man therefore blessed ? No : as a walled town is more worthier than a village , so is the forehead of a married man more honourable than the bare brow of a bachelor ; and by how much defence is better than no skill , by so much is a horn more precious than to want . Here comes Sir Oliver .

Sir Oliver Martext , you are well met : will you dispatch us here under this tree , or shall we go with you to your chapel ?

Is there none here to give the woman ?

I will not take her on gift of any man .

Truly , she must be given , or the marriage is not lawful .

Proceed , proceed : I'll give her .

Good even , good Master What-ye-call't . how do you , sir ? You are very well met : God 'ild you for your last company : I am very glad to see you : even a toy in hand here , sir : nay , pray be covered .

Will you be married , motley ?

As the ox hath his bow , sir , the horse his curb , and the falcon her bells , so man hath his desires ; and as pigeons bill , so wedlock would be nibbling .

And will you , being a man of your breeding , be married under a bush , like a beggar ? Get you to church , and have a good priest that can tell you what marriage is : this fellow will but join you together as they join wainscot ; then one of you will prove a shrunk panel , and like green timber , warp , warp .

I am not in the mind but I were better to be married of him than of another : for he is not like to marry me well , and not being well married , it will be a good excuse for me hereafter to leave my wife .

Go thou with me , and let me counsel thee .

Come , sweet Audrey :
We must be married , or we must live in bawdry .
Farewell , good Master Oliver : not 

O sweet Oliver !
O brave Oliver !
Leave me not behind thee :

but ,

Wind away ,
Begone , I say ,
I will not to wedding with thee .

'Tis no matter : ne'er a fantastical knave of them all shall flout me out of my calling .


Never talk to me : I will weep .

Do , I prithee ; but yet have the grace to consider that tears do not become a man .

But have I not cause to weep ?

As good cause as one would desire ; therefore weep .

His very hair is of the dissembling colour .

Something browner than Judas's ; marry , his kisses are Judas's own children .

I' faith , his hair is of a good colour .

An excellent colour : your chesnut was ever the only colour .

And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch of holy bread .

He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana : a nun of winter's sisterhood kisses not more religiously ; the very ice of chastity is in them .

But why did he swear he would come this morning , and comes not ?

Nay , certainly , there is no truth in him .

Do you think so ?

Yes : I think he is not a pick-purse nor a horse-stealer ; but for his verity in love , I do think him as concave as a covered goblet or a worm-eaten nut .

Not true in love ?

Yes , when he is in ; but I think he is not in .

You have heard him swear downright he was .

'Was' is not 'is :' besides , the oath of a lover is no stronger than the word of a tapster ; they are both the confirmers of false reckonings . He attends here in the forest on the duke your father .

I met the duke yesterday and had much question with him . He asked me of what parentage I was ; I told him , of as good as he ; so he laughed , and let me go . But what talk we of fathers , when there is such a man as Orlando ?

O , that's a brave man ! he writes brave verses , speaks brave words , swears brave oaths , and breaks them bravely , quite traverse , athwart the heart of his lover ; as a puisny tilter , that spurs his horse but on one side , breaks his staff like a noble goose . But all's brave that youth mounts and folly guides . Who comes here ?


Mistress and master , you have oft inquir'd 
After the shepherd that complain'd of love ,
Who you saw sitting by me on the turf ,
Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess 
That was his mistress .

Well , and what of him ?

If you will see a pageant truly play'd ,
Between the pale complexion of true love 
And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain ,
Go hence a little , and I shall conduct you ,
If you will mark it .

O ! come , let us remove :
The sight of lovers feedeth those in love .
Bring us to this sight , and you shall say 
I'll prove a busy actor in their play .


Sweet Phebe , do not scorn me ; do not , Phebe :
Say that you love me not , but say not so 
In bitterness . The common executioner ,
Whose heart the accustom'd sight of death makes hard ,
Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck 
But first begs pardon : will you sterner be 
Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops ?


I would not be thy executioner :
I fly thee , for I would not injure thee .
Thou tell'st me there is murder in mine eye :
'Tis pretty , sure , and very probable ,
That eyes , that are the frail'st and softest things ,
Who shut their coward gates on atomies ,
Should be call'd tyrants , butchers , murderers !
Now I do frown on thee with all my heart ;
And , if mine eyes can wound , now let them kill thee ;
Now counterfeit to swound ; why now fall down ;
Or , if thou canst not , O ! for shame , for shame ,
Lie not , to say mine eyes are murderers .
Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee ;
Scratch thee but with a pin , and there remains 
Some scar of it ; lean but upon a rush ,
The cicatrice and capable impressure 
Thy palm some moment keeps ; but now mine eyes ,
Which I have darted at thee , hurt thee not ,
Nor , I am sure , there is no force in eyes 
That can do hurt .

O dear Phebe ,
If ever ,as that ever may be near ,
You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy ,
Then shall you know the wounds invisible 
That love's keen arrows make .

But , till that time 
Come not thou near me ; and , when that time comes ,
Afflict me with thy mocks , pity me not ;
As , till that time I shall not pity thee .

And why , I pray you ? Who might be your mother ,
That you insult , exult , and all at once ,
Over the wretched ? What though you have no beauty ,
As by my faith , I see no more in you 
Than without candle may go dark to bed ,
Must you be therefore proud and pitiless ?
Why , what means this ? Why do you look on me ?
I see no more in you than in the ordinary 
Of nature's sale-work . Od's my little life !
I think she means to tangle my eyes too .
No , faith , proud mistress , hope not after it :
'Tis not your inky brows , your black silk hair ,
Your bugle eyeballs , nor your cheek of cream ,
That can entame my spirits to your worship .
You foolish shepherd , wherefore do you follow her ,
Like foggy south puffing with wind and rain ?
You are a thousand times a properer man 
Than she a woman : 'tis such fools as you 
That make the world full of ill-favour'd children :
'Tis not her glass , but you , that flatters her ;
And out of you she sees herself more proper 
Than any of her lineaments can show her .
But , mistress , know yourself : down on your knees ,
And thank heaven , fasting , for a good man's love :
For I must tell you friendly in your ear ,
Sell when you can ; you are not for all markets .
Cry the man mercy ; love him ; take his offer :
Foul is most foul , being foul to be a scoffer .
So take her to thee , shepherd . Fare you well .

Sweet youth , I pray you , chide a year together :
I had rather hear you chide than this man woo .

He's fallen in love with her foulness , and she'll fall in love with my anger . If it be so , as fast as she answers thee with frowning looks , I'll sauce her with bitter words . Why look you so upon me ?

For no ill will I bear you .

I pray you , do not fall in love with me ,
For I am falser than vows made in wine :
Besides , I like you not . If you will know my house ,
'Tis at the tuft of olives here hard by .
Will you go , sister ? Shepherd , ply her hard .
Come , sister . Shepherdess , look on him better ,
And be not proud : though all the world could see ,
None could be so abus'd in sight as he .
Come , to our flock .


Dead shepherd , now I find thy saw of might :
'Who ever lov'd that lov'd not at first sight ?' 

Sweet Phebe ,

Ha ! what sayst thou , Silvius ?

Sweet Phebe , pity me .

Why , I am sorry for thee , gentle Silvius .

Wherever sorrow is , relief would be :
If you do sorrow at my grief in love ,
By giving love your sorrow and my grief 
Were both extermin'd .

Thou hast my love : is not that neighbourly ?

I would have you .

Why , that were covetousness .
Silvius , the time was that I hated thee ;
And yet it is not that I bear thee love :
But since that thou canst talk of love so well ,
Thy company , which erst was irksome to me ,
I will endure , and I'll employ thee too ;
But do not look for further recompense 
Than thine own gladness that thou art employ'd .

So holy and so perfect is my love ,
And I in such a poverty of grace ,
That I shall think it a most plenteous crop 
To glean the broken ears after the man 
That the main harvest reaps : loose now and then 
A scatter'd smile , and that I'll live upon .

Know'st thou the youth that spoke to me erewhile ?

Not very well , but I have met him oft ;
And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds 
That the old carlot once was master of .

Think not I love him , though I ask for him .
'Tis but a peevish boy ; yet he talks well ;
But what care I for words ? yet words do well ,
When he that speaks them pleases those that hear .
It is a pretty youth : not very pretty :
But , sure , he's proud ; and yet his pride becomes him :
He'll make a proper man : the best thing in him 
Is his complexion ; and faster than his tongue 
Did make offence his eye did heal it up .
He is not very tall ; yet for his years he's tall :
His leg is but so so ; and yet 'tis well :
There was a pretty redness in his lip ,
A little riper and more lusty red 
Than that mix'd in his cheek ; 'twas just the difference 
Betwixt the constant red and mingled damask .
There be some women , Silvius , had they mark'd him 
In parcels as I did , would have gone near 
To fall in love with him ; but , for my part ,
I love him not nor hate him not ; and yet 
Have more cause to hate him than to love him :
For what had he to do to chide at me ?
He said mine eyes were black and my hair black ;
And , now I am remember'd , scorn'd at me .
I marvel why I answer'd not again :
But that's all one ; omittance is no quittance .
I'll write to him a very taunting letter ,
And thou shalt bear it : wilt thou , Silvius ?

Phebe , with all my heart .

I'll write it straight ;
The matter's in my head and in my heart :
I will be bitter with him and passing short .
Go with me , Silvius .

I prithee , pretty youth , let me be better acquainted with thee .

They say you are a melancholy fellow .

I am so ; I do love it better than laughing .

Those that are in extremity of either are abominable fellows , and betray themselves to every modern censure worse than drunkards .

Why , 'tis good to be sad and say nothing .

Why , then , 'tis good to be a post .

I have neither the scholar's melancholy , which is emulation ; nor the musician's , which is fantastical ; nor the courtier's , which is proud ; nor the soldier's , which is ambitious ; nor the lawyer's , which is politic ; nor the lady's , which is nice ; nor the lover's , which is all these : but it is a melancholy of mine own , compounded of many simples , extracted from many objects , and indeed the sundry contemplation of my travels , which , by often rumination , wraps me in a most humorous sadness .

A traveller ! By my faith , you have great reason to be sad . I fear you have sold your own lands to see other men's ; then , to have seen much and to have nothing , is to have rich eyes and poor hands .

Yes , I have gained my experience .

And your experience makes you sad : I had rather have a fool to make me merry than experience to make me sad : and to travel for it too !


Good day , and happiness , dear Rosalind !

Nay then , God be wi' you , an you talk in blank verse .


Farewell , Monsieur Traveller : look you lisp , and wear strange suits , disable all the benefits of your own country , be out of love with your nativity , and almost chide God for making you that countenance you are ; or I will scarce think you have swam in a gondola . Why , how now , Orlando ! where have you been all this while ? You a lover ! An you serve me such another trick , never come in my sight more .

My fair Rosalind , I come within an hour of my promise .

Break an hour's promise in love ! He that will divide a minute into a thousand parts , and break but a part of the thousandth part of a minute in the affairs of love , it may be said of him that Cupid hath clapped him o' the shoulder , but I'll warrant him heart-whole .

Pardon me , dear Rosalind .

Nay , an you be so tardy , come no more in my sight : I had as lief be wooed of a snail .

Of a snail !

Ay , of a snail ; for though he comes slowly , he carries his house on his head ; a better jointure , I think , than you make a woman : besides , he brings his destiny with him .

What's that ?

Why , horns ; that such as you are fain to be beholding to your wives for : but he comes armed in his fortune and prevents the slander of his wife .

Virtue is no horn-maker ; and my Rosalind is virtuous .

And I am your Rosalind ?

It pleases him to call you so ; but he hath a Rosalind of a better leer than you .

Come , woo me , woo me ; for now I am in a holiday humour , and like enough to consent . What would you say to me now , an I were your very very Rosalind ?

I would kiss before I spoke .

Nay , you were better speak first , and when you were gravelled for lack of matter , you might take occasion to kiss . Very good orators , when they are out , they will spit ; and for lovers lacking ,God warn us !matter , the cleanliest shift is to kiss .

How if the kiss be denied ?

Then she puts you to entreaty , and there begins new matter .

Who could be out , being before his beloved mistress ?

Marry , that should you , if I were your mistress ; or I should think my honesty ranker than my wit .

What , of my suit ?

Not out of your apparel , and yet out of your suit . Am not I your Rosalind ?

I take some joy to say you are , because I would be talking of her .

Well , in her person I say I will not have you .

Then in mine own person I die .

No , faith , die by attorney . The poor world is almost six thousand years old , and in all this time there was not any man died in his own person , videlicet , in a love-cause . Troilus had his brains dashed out with a Grecian club ; yet he did what he could to die before , and he is one of the patterns of love . Leander , he would have lived many a fair year , though Hero had turned nun , if it had not been for a hot mid-summer night ; for , good youth , he went but forth to wash him in the Hellespont , and being taken with the cramp was drowned ; and the foolish coroners of that age found it was 'Hero of Sestos .' But these are all lies : men have died from time to time , and worms have eaten them , but not for love .

I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind ; for , I protest , her frown might kill me .

By this hand , it will not kill a fly . But come , now I will be your Rosalind in a more coming-on disposition ; and ask me what you will , I will grant it .

Then love me , Rosalind .

Yes , faith will I , Fridays and Saturdays and all .

And wilt thou have me ?

Ay , and twenty such .

What sayest thou ?

Are you not good ?

I hope so .

Why then , can one desire too much of a good thing ?Come , sister , you shall be the priest and marry us .Give me your hand , Orlando . What do you say , sister ?

Pray thee , marry us .

I cannot say the words .

You must begin ,'Will you , Orlando ,' 

Go to .Will you , Orlando , have to wife this Rosalind ?

I will .

Ay , but when ?

Why now ; as fast as she can marry us .

Then you must say , 'I take thee , Rosalind , for wife .' 

I take thee , Rosalind , for wife .

I might ask you for your commission ; but , I do take thee , Orlando , for my husband : there's a girl goes before the priest ; and , certainly , a woman's thought runs before her actions .

So do all thoughts ; they are winged .

Now tell me how long you would have her after you have possessed her ?

For ever and a day .

Say 'a day ,' without the 'ever .' No , no , Orlando ; men are April when they woo , December when they wed : maids are May when they are maids , but the sky changes when they are wives . I will be more jealous of thee than a Barbary cock-pigeon over his hen ; more clamorous than a parrot against rain ; more new-fangled than an ape ; more giddy in my desires than a monkey : I will weep for nothing , like Diana in the fountain , and I will do that when you are disposed to be merry ; I will laugh like a hyen , and that when thou art inclined to sleep .

But will my Rosalind do so ?

By my life , she will do as I do .

O ! but she is wise .

Or else she could not have the wit to do this : the wiser , the waywarder : make the doors upon a woman's wit , and it will out at the casement ; shut that , and 'twill out at the key-hole ; stop that , 'twill fly with the smoke out at the chimney .

A man that hath a wife with such a wit , he might say , 'Wit , whither wilt ?' 

Nay , you might keep that check for it till you met your wife's wit going to your neighbour's bed .

And what wit could wit have to excuse that ?

Marry , to say she came to seek you there . You shall never take her without her answer , unless you take her without her tongue . O ! that woman that cannot make her fault her husband's occasion , let her never nurse her child herself , for she will breed it like a fool .

For these two hours , Rosalind , I will leave thee .

Alas ! dear love , I cannot lack thee two hours .

I must attend the duke at dinner : by two o'clock I will be with thee again .

Ay , go your ways , go your ways ; I knew what you would prove , my friends told me as much , and I thought no less : that flattering tongue of yours won me : 'tis but one cast away , and so , come , death ! Two o'clock is your hour ?

Ay , sweet Rosalind .

By my troth , and in good earnest , and so God mend me , and by all pretty oaths that are not dangerous , if you break one jot of your promise or come one minute behind your hour , I will think you the most pathetical break-promise , and the most hollow lover , and the most unworthy of her you call Rosalind , that may be chosen out of the gross band of the unfaithful . Therefore , beware my censure , and keep your promise .

With no less religion than if thou wert indeed my Rosalind : so , adieu .

Well , Time is the old justice that examines all such offenders , and let Time try . Adieu .


You have simply misused our sex in your love-prate : we must have your doublot and hose plucked over your head , and show the world what the bird hath done to her own nest .

O coz , coz , coz , my pretty little coz , that thou didst know how many fathom deep I am in love ! But it cannot be sounded : my affection hath an unknown bottom , like the bay of Portugal .

Or rather , bottomless ; that as fast as you pour affection in , it runs out .

No ; that same wicked bastard of Venus , that was begot of thought , conceived of spleen , and born of madness , that blind rascally boy that abuses every one's eyes because his own are out , let him be judge how deep I am in love . I'll tell thee , Aliena , I cannot be out of the sight of Orlando : I'll go find a shadow and sigh till he come .

And I'll sleep .


Which is he that killed the deer ?

Sir , it was I .

Let's present him to the duke , like a 
Roman conqueror ; and it would do well to set the deer's horns upon his head for a branch of victory . Have you no song , forester , for this purpose ?

Yes , sir .

Sing it : 'tis no matter how it be in tune so it make noise enough .

What shall he have that kill'd the deer ?
His leather skin and horns to wear .
Then sing him home 

Take thou no scorn to wear the horn ;
It was a crest ere thou wast born :
Thy father's father wore it ,
And thy father bore it :
The horn , the horn , the lusty horn 
Is not a thing to laugh to scorn 


How say you now ? Is it not past two o'clock ? And here much Orlando !

I warrant you , with pure love and a troubled brain , he hath ta'en his bow and arrows , and is gone forth to sleep . Look , who comes here .


My errand is to you , fair youth .
My gentle Phebe did bid me give you this :

I know not the contents ; but , as I guess 
By the stern brow and waspish action 
Which she did use as she was writing of it ,
It bears an angry tenour : pardon me ;
I am but as a guiltless messenger .

Patience herself would startle at this letter ,
And play the swaggerer : bear this , bear all :
She says I am not fair ; that I lack manners ;
She calls me proud , and that she could not love me 
Were man as rare as ph nix . 'Od's my will !
Her love is not the hare that I do hunt :
Why writes she so to me ? Well , shepherd , well ,
This is a letter of your own device .

No , I protest , I know not the contents :
Phebe did write it .

Come , come , you are a fool ,
And turn'd into the extremity of love .
I saw her hand : she has a leathern hand ,
A freestone-colour'd hand ; I verily did think 
That her old gloves were on , but 'twas her hands :
She has a housewife's hand ; but that's no matter :
I say she never did invent this letter ;
This is a man's invention , and his hand .

Sure , it is hers .

Why , 'tis a boisterous and a cruel style ,
A style for challengers ; why , she defies me ,
Like Turk to Christian : woman's gentle brain 
Could not drop forth such giant-rude invention ,
Such Ethiop words , blacker in their effect 
Than in their countenance . Will you hear the letter ?

So please you , for I never heard it yet ;
Yet heard too much of Phebe's cruelty .

She Phebes me . Mark how the tyrant writes .

Art thou god to shepherd turn'd ,
That a maiden's heart hath burn'd ?

Can a woman rail thus ?

Call you this railing ?

Why , thy godhead laid apart ,
Warr'st thou with a woman's heart ?

Did you ever hear such railing ?

Whiles the eye of man did woo me ,
That could do no vengeance to me .

Meaning me a beast .

If the scorn of your bright eyne 
Have power to raise such love in mine ,
Alack ! in me what strange effect 
Would they work in mild aspect .
Whiles you chid me , I did love ,
How then might your prayers move !
He that brings this love to thee 
Little knows this love in me ;
And by him seal up thy mind ;
Whether that thy youth and kind 
Will the faithful offer take 
Of me and all that I can make ;
Or else by him my love deny ,
And then I'll study how to die .


Call you this chiding ?

Alas , poor shepherd !

Do you pity him ? no , he deserves no pity . Wilt thou love such a woman ? What , to make thee an instrument and play false strains upon thee ! not to be endured ! Well , go your way to her , for I see love hath made thee a tame snake , and say this to her : that if she love me , I charge her to love thee : if she will not , I will never have her , unless thou entreat for her . If you be a true lover , hence , and not a word , for here comes more company .

Good morrow , fair ones . Pray you if you know ,
Where in the purlieus of this forest stands 
A sheepcote fenc'd about with olive-trees ?

West of this place , down in the neighbour bottom :
The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream 
Left on your right hand brings you to the place .
But at this hour the house doth keep itself ;
There's none within .

If that an eye may profit by a tongue ,
Then should I know you by description ;
Such garments , and such years : 'The boy is fair ,
Of female favour , and bestows himself 
Like a ripe sister : but the woman low ,
And browner than her brother .' Are not you 
The owner of the house I did inquire for ?

It is no boast , being ask'd , to say , we are .

Orlando doth commend him to you both ,
And to that youth he calls his Rosalind 
He sends this bloody napkin . Are you he ?

I am : what must we understand by this ?

Some of my shame ; if you will know of me 
What man I am , and how , and why , and where 
This handkercher was stain'd .

I pray you , tell it .

When last the young Orlando parted from you 
He left a promise to return again 
Within an hour ; and , pacing through the forest ,
Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy ,
Lo , what befell ! he threw his eye aside ,
And mark what object did present itself :
Under an oak , whose boughs were moss'd with age ,
And high top bald with dry antiquity ,
A wretched ragged man , o'ergrown with hair ,
Lay sleeping on his back : about his neck 
A green and gilded snake had wreath'd itself ,
Who with her head nimble in threats approach'd 
The opening of his mouth ; but suddenly ,
Seeing Orlando , it unlink'd itself ,
And with indented glides did slip away 
Into a bush ; under which bush's shade 
A lioness , with udders all drawn dry ,
Lay couching , head on ground , with catlike watch ,
When that the sleeping man should stir ; for 'tis 
The royal disposition of that beast 
To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead :
This seen , Orlando did approach the man ,
And found it was his brother , his elder brother .

O ! I have heard him speak of that same brother ;
And he did render him the most unnatural 
That liv'd 'mongst men .

And well he might so do ,
For well I know he was unnatural .

But , to Orlando : did he leave him there ,
Food to the suck'd and hungry lioness ?

Twice did he turn his back and purpos'd so ;
But kindness , nobler ever than revenge ,
And nature , stronger than his just occasion ,
Made him give battle to the lioness ,
Who quickly fell before him : in which hurtling 
From miserable slumber I awak'd .

Are you his brother ?

Was it you he rescu'd ?

Was't you that did so oft contrive to kill him ?

'Twas I ; but 'tis not I . I do not shame 
To tell you what I was , since my conversion 
So sweetly tastes , being the thing I am .

But , for the bloody napkin ?

By and by .
When from the first to last , betwixt us two ,
Tears our recountments had most kindly bath'd ,
As how I came into that desert place :
In brief , he led me to the gentle duke ,
Who gave me fresh array and entertainment ,
Committing me unto my brother's love ;
Who led me instantly unto his cave ,
There stripp'd himself ; and here , upon his arm 
The lioness had torn some flesh away ,
Which all this while had bled ; and now he fainted ,
And cried , in fainting , upon Rosalind .
Brief , I recover'd him , bound up his wound ;
And , after some small space , being strong at heart ,
He sent me hither , stranger as I am ,
To tell this story , that you might excuse 
His broken promise ; and to give this napkin ,
Dy'd in his blood , unto the shepherd youth 
That he in sport doth call his Rosalind .

Why , how now , Ganymede ! sweet Ganymede !

Many will swoon when they do look on blood .

There is more in it . Cousin ! Ganymede !

Look , he recovers .

I would I were at home .

We'll lead you thither . I pray you , will you take him by the arm ?

Be of good cheer , youth . You a man ! You lack a man's heart .

I do so , I confess it . Ah , sirrah ! a body would think this was well counterfeited . I pray you , tell your brother how well I counterfeited . Heigh-ho !

This was not counterfeit : there is too great testimony in your complexion that it was a passion of earnest .

Counterfeit , I assure you .

Well then , take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man .

So I do ; but , i' faith , I should have been a woman by right .

Come ; you look paler and paler : pray you , draw homewards . Good sir , go with us .

That will I , for I must bear answer back How you excuse my brother , Rosalind .

I shall devise something . But , I pray you , commend my counterfeiting to him . Will you go ?

We shall find a time , Audrey : patience , gentle Audrey .

Faith , the priest was good enough , for all the old gentleman's saying .

A most wicked Sir Oliver , Audrey ; a most vile Martext . But , Audrey , there is a youth here in the forest lays claim to you .

Ay , I know who 'tis : he hath no interest in me in the world . Here comes the man you mean .


It is meat and drink to me to see a clown . By my troth , we that have good wits have much to answer for : we shall be flouting ; we cannot hold .

Good even , Audrey .

God ye good even , William .

And good even to you , sir .

Good even , gentle friend . Cover thy head , cover thy head ; nay , prithee , be covered . How old are you , friend ?

Five-and-twenty , sir .

A ripe age . Is thy name William ?

William , sir .

A fair name . Wast born i' the forest here ?

Ay , sir , I thank God .

'Thank God ;' a good answer . Art rich ?

Faith , sir , so so .

'So so ,' is good , very good , very excellent good : and yet it is not ; it is but so so . Art thou wise ?

Ay , sir , I have a pretty wit .

Why , thou sayest well . I do now remember a saying , 'The fool doth think he is wise , but the wise man knows himself to be a fool .' The heathen philosopher , when he had a desire to eat a grape , would open his lips when he put it into his mouth ; meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and lips to open . You do love this maid ?

I do , sir .

Give me your hand . Art thou learned ?

No , sir .

Then learn this of me : to have , is to have ; for it is a figure in rhetoric , that drink , being poured out of a cup into a glass , by filling the one doth empty the other ; for all your writers do consent that ipse is he : now , you are not ipse , for I am he .

Which he , sir ?

He , sir , that must marry this woman . Therefore , you clown , abandon ,which is in the vulgar , leave ,the society ,which in the boorish is , company ,of this female ,which in the common is , woman ; which together is , abandon the society of this female , or , clown , thou perishest ; or , to thy better understanding , diest ; or , to wit , I kill thee , make thee away , translate thy life into death , thy liberty into bondage . I will deal in poison with thee , or in bastinado , or in steel ; I will bandy with thee in faction ; I will o'errun thee with policy ; I will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways : therefore tremble , and depart .

Do , good William .

God rest you merry , sir .

Our master and mistress seek you : come , away , away !

Trip , Audrey ! trip , Audrey ! I attend , I attend .


Is't possible that on so little acquaintance you should like her ? that , but seeing , you should love her ? and , loving , woo ? and , wooing , she should grant ? and will you persever to enjoy her ?

Neither call the giddiness of it in question , the poverty of her , the small acquaintance , my sudden wooing , nor her sudden consenting ; but say with me , I love Aliena ; say with her , that she loves me ; consent with both , that we may enjoy each other : it shall be to your good ; for my father's house and all the revenue that was old Sir Rowland's will I estate upon you , and here live and die a shepherd .

You have my consent . Let your wedding be to-morrow : thither will I invite the duke and all's contented followers . Go you and prepare Aliena ; for , look you , here comes my Rosalind .


God save you , brother .

And you , fair sister .


O ! my dear Orlando , how it grieves me to see thee wear thy heart in a scarf .

It is my arm .

I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws of a lion .

Wounded it is , but with the eyes of a lady .

Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to swound when he showed me your handkercher ?

Ay , and greater wonders than that .

O ! I know where you are . Nay , 'tis true : there was never anything so sudden but the fight of two rams , and C sar's thrasonical brag of 'I came , saw , and overcame :' for your brother and my sister no sooner met , but they looked ; no sooner looked but they loved ; no sooner loved but they sighed ; no sooner sighed but they asked one another the reason ; no sooner knew the reason but they sought the remedy : and in these degrees have they made a pair of stairs to marriage which they will climb incontinent , or else be incontinent before marriage . They are in the very wrath of love , and they will together : clubs cannot part them .

They shall be married to-morrow , and I will bid the duke to the nuptial . But , O ! how bitter a thing it is to look into happiness through another man's eyes . By so much the more shall I to-morrow be at the height of heart-heaviness , by how much I shall think my brother happy in having what he wishes for .

Why then , to-morrow I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind ?

I can live no longer by thinking .

I will weary you then no longer with idle talking . Know of me then ,for now I speak to some purpose ,that I know you are a gentleman of good conceit . I speak not this that you should bear a good opinion of my knowledge , insomuch I say I know you are ; neither do I labour for a greater esteem than may in some little measure draw a belief from you , to do yourself good , and not to grace me . Believe then , if you please , that I can do strange things . I have , since I was three years old , conversed with a magician , most profound in his art and yet not damnable . If you do love Rosalind so near the heart as your gesture cries it out , when your brother marries Aliena , shall you marry her . I know into what straits of fortune she is driven ; and it is not impossible to me , if it appear not inconvenient to you , to set her before your eyes to-morrow , human as she is , and without any danger .

Speakest thou in sober meanings ?

By my life , I do ; which I tender dearly , though I say I am a magician . Therefore , put you in your best array ; bid your friends ; for if you will be married to-morrow , you shall ; and to Rosalind , if you will . Look , here comes a lover of mine , and a lover of hers .


Youth , you have done me much ungentleness ,
To show the letter that I writ to you .

I care not if I have : it is my study 
To seem despiteful and ungentle to you .
You are there follow'd by a faithful shepherd :
Look upon him , love him ; he worships you .

Good shepherd , tell this youth what 'tis to love .

It is to be all made of sighs and tears ;
And so am I for Phebe .

And I for Ganymede .

And I for Rosalind .

And I for no woman .

It is to be all made of faith and service ;
And so am I for Phebe .

And I for Ganymede .

And I for Rosalind .

And I for no woman .

It is to be all made of fantasy ,
All made of passion , and all made of wishes ;
All adoration , duty , and observance ;
All humbleness , all patience , and impatience ;
All purity , all trial , all obeisance ;
And so am I for Phebe .

And so am I for Ganymede .

And so am I for Rosalind .

And so am I for no woman .

If this be so , why blame you me to love you ?

If this be so , why blame you me to love you ?

If this be so , why blame you me to love you ?

Who do you speak to , 'Why blame you me to love you ?' 

To her that is not here , nor doth not hear .

Pray you , no more of this : 'tis like the howling of Irish wolves against the moon .


As you love Phebe , meet : and as I love no woman , I'll meet . So , fare you well : I have left you commands .

I'll not fail , if I live .

Nor I .

Nor I .


To-morrow is the joyful day , Audrey ; to-morrow will we be married .

I do desire it with all my heart , and I hope it is no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the world . Here come two of the banished duke's pages .


Well met , honest gentleman .

By my troth , well met . Come , sit , sit , and a song .

We are for you : sit i' the middle .

Shall we clap into't roundly , without hawking or spitting , or saying we are hoarse , which are the only prologues to a bad voice ?

I'faith , i'faith ; and both in a tune , like two gipsies on a horse .

It was a lover and his lass ,
With a hey , and a ho , and a hey nonino ,
That o'er the green corn-field did pass ,
In the spring time , the only pretty ring time ,
When birds do sing , hey ding a ding , ding ;
Sweet lovers love the spring .
Between the acres of the rye ,
With a hey , and a ho , and a hey nonino ,
These pretty country folks would lie ,
In the spring time ,  &c .
This carol they began that hour ,
With a hey , and a ho , and a hey nonino ,
How that a life was but a flower 
In the spring time ,  &c .
And therefore take the present time ,
With a hey , and a ho , and a hey nonino ;
For love is crowned with the prime 
In the spring time ,  &c .

Truly , young gentlemen , though there was no great matter in the ditty , yet the note was very untuneable .

You are deceived , sir : we kept time ; we lost not our time .

By my troth , yes ; I count it but time lost to hear such a foolish song . God be wi' you ; and God mend your voices ! Come , Audrey .


Dost thou believe , Orlando , that the boy 
Can do all this that he hath promised ?

I sometimes do believe , and sometimes do not ;
As those that fear they hope , and know they fear .


Patience once more , whiles our compact is urg'd .


You say , if I bring in your Rosalind ,
You will bestow her on Orlando here ?

That would I , had I kingdoms to give with her .

And you say , you will have her when I bring her ?

That would I , were I of all kingdoms king .

You say , that you'll marry me , if I be willing ?

That will I , should I die the hour after .

But if you do refuse to marry me ,
You'll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd ?

So is the bargain .

You say , that you'll have Phebe , if she will ?

Though to have her and death were both one thing .

I have promis'd to make all this matter even .
Keep you your word , O duke , to give your daughter ;
You yours , Orlando , to receive his daughter ;
Keep your word , Phebe , that you'll marry me ,
Or else , refusing me , to wed this shepherd ;
Keep your word , Silvius , that you'll marry her ,
If she refuse me : and from hence I go ,
To make these doubts all even .


I do remember in this shepherd boy 
Some lively touches of my daughter's favour .

My lord , the first time that I ever saw him ,
Methought he was a brother to your daughter ;
But , my good lord , this boy is forest-born ,
And hath been tutor'd in the rudiments 
Of many desperate studies by his uncle ,
Whom he reports to be a great magician ,
Obscured in the circle of this forest .


There is , sure , another flood toward , and these couples are coming to the ark . Here comes a pair of very strange beasts , which in all tongues are called fools .

Salutation and greeting to you all !

Good my lord , bid him welcome . This is the motley-minded gentleman that I have so often met in the forest : he hath been a courtier , he swears .

If any man doubt that , let him put me to my purgation . I have trod a measure ; I have flattered a lady ; I have been politic with my friend , smooth with mine enemy ; I have undone three tailors ; I have had four quarrels , and like to have fought one .

And how was that ta'en up ?

Faith , we met , and found the quarrel was upon the seventh cause .

How seventh cause ? Good my lord , like this fellow .

I like him very well .

God 'ild you , sir ; I desire you of the like . I press in here , sir , amongst the rest of the country copulatives , to swear , and to forswear , according as marriage binds and blood breaks . A poor virgin , sir , an ill-favoured thing , sir , but mine own : a poor humour of mine , sir , to take that that no man else will . Rich honesty dwells like a miser , sir , in a poor house , as your pearl in your foul oyster .

By my faith , he is very swift and sententious .

According to the fool's bolt , sir , and such dulcet diseases .

But , for the seventh cause ; how did you find the quarrel on the seventh cause ?

Upon a lie seven times removed :bear your body more seeming , Audrey :as thus , sir . I did dislike the cut of a certain courtier's beard : he sent me word , if I said his beard was not cut well , he was in the mind it was : this is called 'the retort courteous .' If I sent him word again , it was not well cut , he would send me word , he cut it to please himself : this is called the 'quip modest .' If again , it was not well cut , he disabled my judgment : this is called the 'reply churlish .' If again , it was not well cut , he would answer , I spake not true : this is called the 'reproof valiant :' if again , it was not well cut , he would say , I lie : this is called the 'countercheck quarrelsome' : and so to the 'lie circumstantial ,' and the 'lie direct .' 

And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut ?

I durst go no further than the 'lie circumstantial ,' nor he durst not give me the 'lie direct ;' and so we measured swords and parted .

Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie ?

O sir , we quarrel in print ; by the book , as you have books for good manners : I will name you the degrees . The first , the 'retort courteous ;' the second , the 'quip modest ;' the third , the 'reply churlish ;' the fourth , the 'reproof valiant ;' the fifth , the 'countercheck quarrelsome ;' the sixth , the 'lie with circumstance ;' the seventh , the 'lie direct .' All these you may avoid but the lie direct ; and you may avoid that too , with an 'if .' I knew when seven justices could not take up a quarrel ; but when the parties were met themselves , one of them thought but of an 'if ,' as 'If you said so , then I said so ;' and they shook hands and swore brothers . Your 'if' is the only peace-maker ; much virtue in 'if .' 

Is not this a rare fellow , my lord ? he's as good at any thing , and yet a fool .

He uses his folly like a stalking-horse , and under the presentation of that he shoots his wit .


Then is there mirth in heaven ,
When earthly things made even 
Atone together .
Good duke , receive thy daughter ;
Hymen from heaven brought her ;
Yea , brought her hither ,
That thou mightst join her hand with his ,
Whose heart within her bosom is .

To you I give myself , for I am yours .


To you I give myself , for I am yours .

If there be truth in sight , you are my daughter .

If there be truth in sight , you are my Rosalind .

If sight and shape be true ,
Why then , my love adieu !

I'll have no father , if you be not he .


I'll have no husband , if you be not he :


Nor ne'er wed woman , if you be not she .


Peace , ho ! I bar confusion :
'Tis I must make conclusion 
Of these most strange events :
Here's eight that must take hands 
To join in Hymen's bands ,
If truth holds true contents .


You and you no cross shall part :


You and you are heart in heart :


You to his love must accord ,
Or have a woman to your lord :


You and you are sure together ,
As the winter to foul weather .
Whiles a wedlock hymn we sing ,
Feed yourselves with questioning ,
That reason wonder may diminish ,
How thus we met , and these things finish .


Wedding is great Juno's crown :
O blessed bond of board and bed !
'Tis Hymen peoples every town ;
High wedlock then be honoured .
Honour , high honour , and renown ,
To Hymen , god of every town !

O my dear niece ! welcome thou art to me :
Even daughter , welcome in no less degree .

I will not eat my word , now thou art mine ;
Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine .


Let me have audience for a word or two :
I am the second son of old Sir Rowland ,
That bring these tidings to this fair assembly .
Duke Frederick , hearing how that every day 
Men of great worth resorted to this forest ,
Address'd a mighty power , which were on foot 
In his own conduct , purposely to take 
His brother here and put him to the sword :
And to the skirts of this wild wood he came ,
Where , meeting with an old religious man ,
After some question with him , was converted 
Both from his enterprise and from the world ;
His crown bequeathing to his banish'd brother ,
And all their lands restor'd to them again 
That were with him exil'd . This to be true ,
I do engage my life .

Welcome , young man ;
Thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers' wedding :
To one , his lands withheld ; and to the other 
A land itself at large , a potent dukedom .
First , in this forest , let us do those ends 
That here were well begun and well begot ;
And after , every of this happy number 
That have endur'd shrewd days and nights with us ,
Shall share the good of our returned fortune ,
According to the measure of their states .
Meantime , forget this new-fall'n dignity ,
And fall into our rustic revelry .
Play , music ! and you , brides and bridegrooms all ,
With measure heap'd in joy , to the measures fall .

Sir , by your patience . If I heard you rightly ,
The duke hath put on a religious life ,
And thrown into neglect the pompous court ?

He hath .

To him will I : out of these convertites 
There is much matter to be heard and learn'd .


You to your former honour I bequeath ;
Your patience and your virtue well deserve it :


You to a love that your true faith doth merit :


You to your land , and love , and great allies :


You to a long and well-deserved bed :


And you to wrangling ; for thy loving voyage 
Is but for two months victual'd . So , to your pleasures :
I am for other than for dancing measures .

Stay , Jaques , stay .

To see no pastime , I : what you would have 
I'll stay to know at your abandon'd cave .


Proceed , proceed : we will begin these rites ,
As we do trust they'll end , in true delights .

It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue ; but it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord the prologue . If it be true that good wine needs no bush , 'tis true that a good play needs no epilogue ; yet to good wine they do use good bushes , and good plays prove the better by the help of good epilogues . What a case am I in then , that am neither a good epilogue , nor cannot insinuate with you in the behalf of a good play ! I am not furnished like a beggar , therefore to beg will not become me : my way is , to conjure you ; and I'll begin with the women . I charge you , O women ! for the love you bear to men , to like as much of this play as please you : and I charge you , O men ! for the love you bear to women ,as I perceive by your simpering none of you hate them ,that between you and the women , the play may please . If I were a woman I would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased me , complexions that liked me , and breaths that I defied not ; and , I am sure , as many as have good beards , or good faces , or sweet breaths , will , for my kind offer , when I make curtsy , bid me farewell .

CYMBELINE

You do not meet a man but frowns ; our bloods 
No more obey the heavens than our courtiers 
Still seem as does the king .

But what's the matter ?

His daughter , and the heir of 's kingdom , whom 
He purpos'd to his wife's sole son ,a widow 
That late he married ,hath referr'd herself 
Unto a poor but worthy gentleman . She's wedded ;
Her husband banish'd , she imprison'd : all 
Is outward sorrow , though I think the king 
Be touch'd at very heart .

None but the king ?

He that hath lost her too ; so is the queen ,
That most desir'd the match ; but not a courtier ,
Although they wear their faces to the bent 
Of the king's looks , hath a heart that is not 
Glad at the thing they scowl at .

And why so ?

He that hath miss'd the princess is a thing 
Too bad for bad report ; and he that hath her ,
I mean that married her , alack ! good man !
And therefore banish'd is a creature such 
As , to seek through the regions of the earth 
For one his like , there would be something failing 
In him that should compare . I do not think 
So fair an outward and such stuff within 
Endows a man but he .

You speak him far .

I do extend him , sir , within himself ,
Crush him together rather than unfold 
His measure duly .

What's his name and birth ?

I cannot delve him to the root : his father 
Was called Sicilius , who did join his honour 
Against the Romans with Cassibelan ,
But had his titles by Tenantius whom 
He serv'd with glory and admir'd success ,
So gain'd the sur-addition Leonatus ;
And had , besides this gentleman in question ,
Two other sons , who in the wars o' the time 
Died with their swords in hand ; for which their father 
Then old and fond of issue took such sorrow 
That he quit being , and his gentle lady ,
Big of this gentleman , our theme , deceas'd 
As he was born . The king , he takes the babe 
To his protection ; calls him Posthumus Leonatus ;
Breeds him and makes him of his bedchamber ,
Puts to him all the learnings that his time 
Could make him the receiver of ; which he took ,
As we do air , fast as 'twas minister'd ,
And in's spring became a harvest ; liv'd in court ,
Which rare it is to do most prais'd , most lov'd ;
A sample to the youngest , to the more mature 
A glass that feated them , and to the graver 
A child that guided dotards ; to his mistress ,
For whom he now is banish'd , her own price 
Proclaims how she esteem'd him and his virtue ;
By her election may be truly read 
What kind of man he is .

I honour him ,
Even out of your report . But pray you , tell me ,
Is she sole child to the king ?

His only child .
He had twosons ,if this be worth your hearing ,
Mark it ,the eldest of them at three years old ,
I' the swathing clothes the other , from their nursery 
Were stol'n ; and to this hour no guess in knowledge 
Which way they went .

How long is this ago ?

Some twenty years .

That a king's children should be so convey'd ,
So slackly guarded , and the search so slow ,
That could not trace them !

Howsoe'er 'tis strange ,
Or that the negligence may well be laugh'd at ,
Yet is it true , sir .

I do well believe you .

We must forbear . Here comes the gentleman ,
The queen , and princess .

No , be assur'd you shall not find me , daughter ,
After the slander of most step-mothers ,
Evil-ey'd unto you ; you're my prisoner , but 
Your gaoler shall deliver you the keys 
That lock up your restraint . For you , Posthumus ,
So soon as I can win the offended king ,
I will be known your advocate ; marry , yet 
The fire of rage is in him , and 'twere good 
You lean'd unto his sentence with what patience 
Your wisdom may inform you .

Please your highness ,
I will from hence to-day .

You know the peril :
I'll fetch a turn about the garden , pitying 
The pangs of barr'd affections , though the king 
Hath charg'd you should not speak together .


O !
Dissembling courtesy . How fine this tyrant 
Can tickle where she wounds ! My dearest husband ,
I something fear my father's wrath ; but nothing ,
Always reserv'd my holy duty ,what 
His rage can do on me . You must be gone ;
And I shall here abide the hourly shot 
Of angry eyes , not comforted to live ,
But that there is this jewel in the world 
That I may see again .

My queen ! my mistress !
O lady , weep no more , lest I give cause 
To be suspected of more tenderness 
Than doth become a man . I will remain 
The loyal'st husband that did e'er plight troth .
My residence in Rome at one Philario's ,
Who to my father was a friend , to me 
Known but by letter ; thither write , my queen ,
And with mine eyes I'll drink the words you send ,
Though ink be made of gall .


Be brief , I pray you ;
If the king come , I shall incur I know not 
How much of his displeasure .

Yet I'll move him 
To walk this way . I never do him wrong ,
But he does buy my injuries to be friends ,
Pays dear for my offences .


Should we be taking leave 
As long a term as yet we have to live ,
The loathness to depart would grow . Adieu !

Nay , stay a little :
Were you but riding forth to air yourself 
Such parting were too petty . Look here , love ;
This diamond was my mother's ; take it , heart ;
But keep it till you woo another wife ,
When Imogen is dead .

How ! how ! another ?
You gentle gods , give me but this I have ,
And sear up my embracements from a next 
With bonds of death !Remain , remain thou here 

While sense can keep it on ! And , sweetest , fairest ,
As I my poor self did exchange for you ,
To your so infinite loss , so in our trifles 
I still win of you ; for my sake wear this ;
It is a manacle of love ; I'll place it 
Upon this fairest prisoner .


O the gods !
When shall we see again ?


Alack ! the king !

Thou basest thing , avoid ! hence , from my sight !
If after this command thou fraught the court 
With thy unworthiness , thou diest . Away !
Thou'rt poison to my blood .

The gods protect you 
And bless the good remainders of the court !
I am gone .


There cannot be a pinch in death 
More sharp than this is .

O disloyal thing ,
That shouldst repair my youth , thou heap'st instead 
A year's age on me .

I beseech you , sir ,
Harm not yourself with your vexation ;
I am senseless of your wrath ; a touch more rare 
Subdues all pangs , all fears .

Past grace ? obedience ?

Past hope , and in despair ; that way , past grace .

That mightst have had the sole son of my queen !

O bless'd , that I might not ! I chose an eagle 
And did avoid a puttock .

Thou took'st a beggar ; wouldst have made my throne 
A seat for baseness .

No ; I rather added 
A lustre to it .

O thou vile one !

Sir ,
It is your fault that I have lov'd Posthumus ;
You bred him as my playfellow , and he is 
A man worth any woman , overbuys me 
Almost the sum he pays .

What ! art thou mad ?

Almost , sir ; heaven restore me ! Would I were 
A neat-herd's daughter , and my Leonatus 
Our neighbour shepherd's son !

Thou foolish thing !


They were again together ; you have done 
Not after our command . Away with her ,

And pen her up .

Beseech your patience . Peace !
Dear lady daughter , peace ! Sweet sovereign ,
Leave us to ourselves , and make yourself some comfort 
Out of your best advice .

Nay , let her languish 
A drop of blood a day ; and , being aged ,
Die of this folly !


Fie ! you must give way :

Here is your servant . How now , sir ! What news ?

My lord your son drew on my master .

Ha !
No harm , I trust , is done ?

There might have been ,
But that my master rather play'd than fought ,
And had no help of anger ; they were parted 
By gentlemen at hand .

I am very glad on 't .

Your son's my father's friend ; he takes his part .
To draw upon an exile ! O brave sir !
I would they were in Afric both together ,
Myself by with a needle , that I might prick 
The goer-back . Why came you from your master ?

On his command : he would not suffer me 
To bring him to the haven ; left these notes 
Of what commands I should be subject to ,
When 't pleas'd you to employ me .

This hath been 
Your faithful servant ; I dare lay mine honour 
He will remain so .

I humbly thank your highness .

Pray , walk awhile .

About some half-hour hence ,
I pray you , speak with me . You shall at least 
Go see my lord aboard ; for this time leave me .


Sir , I would advise you to shift a shirt ; the violence of action hath made you reek as a sacrifice . Where air comes out , air comes in ; there's none abroad so wholesome as that you vent .

If my shirt were bloody , them to shift it . Have I hurt him ?

No faith ; not so much as his patience .

Hurt him ! his body's a passable carcass if he be not hurt ; it is a throughfare for steel if it be not hurt .

His steel was in debt ; it went o' the backside the town .

The villain would not stand me .

No ; but he fled forward still , toward your face .

Stand you ! You have land enough of your own ; but he added to your having , gave you some ground .

As many inches as you have oceans . Puppies !

I would they had not come between us .

So would I till you had measured how long a fool you were upon the ground .

And that she should love this fellow and refuse me !

If it be a sin to make a true election , she is damned .

Sir , as I told you always , her beauty and her brain go not together ; she's a good sign , but I have seen small reflection of her wit .

She shines not upon fools , lest the reflection should hurt her .

Come , I'll to my chamber . Would there had been some hurt done !

I wish not so ; unless it had been the fall of an ass , which is no great hurt .

You'll go with us ?

I'll attend your lordship .

Nay , come , let's go together .

Well , my lord .


I would thou grew'st unto the shores of the haven ,
And question'dst every sail : if he should write ,
And I not have it , 'twere a paper lost ,
As offer'd mercy is . What was the last 
That he spake to thee ?

It was his queen , his queen !

Then wav'd his handkerchief ?

And kiss'd it , madam .

Senseless linen , happier therein than I !
And that was all ?

No , madam ; for so long 
As he could make me with this eye or ear 
Distinguish him from others , he did keep 
The deck , with glove , or hat , or handkerchief ,
Still waving , as the fits and stirs of 's mind 
Could best express how slow his soul sail'd on ,
How swift his ship .

Thou shouldst have made him 
As little as a crow , or less , ere left 
To after-eye him .

Madam , so I did .

I would have broke mine eye-strings , crack'd them , but 
To look upon him , till the diminution 
Of space had pointed him sharp as my needle ,
Nay , follow'd him , till he had melted from 
The smallness of a gnat to air , and then 
Have turn'd mine eye , and wept . But , good Pisanio ,
When shall we hear from him ?

Be assur'd , madam ,
With his next vantage .

I did not take my leave of him , but had 
Most pretty things to say ; ere I could tell him 
How I would think on him at certain hours 
Such thoughts and such , or I could make him swear 
The shes of Italy should not betray 
Mine interest and his honour , or have charg'd him ,
At the sixth hour of morn , at noon , at mid-night ,
To encounter me with orisons , for then 
I am in heaven for him ; or ere I could 
Give him that parting kiss which I had set 
Betwixt two charming words , comes in my father ,
And like the tyrannous breathing of the north 
Shakes all our buds from growing .


The queen , madam ,
Desires your highness' company .

Those things I bid you do , get them dispatch'd .
I will attend the queen .

Madam , I shall .


Believe it , sir , I have seen him in Britain ; he was then of a crescent note , expected to prove so worthy as since he hath been allowed the name of ; but I could then have looked on him without the help of admiration , though the catalogue of his endowments had been tabled by his side and I to peruse him by items .

You speak of him when he was less furnished than now he is with that which makes him both without and within .

I have seen him in France : we had very many there could behold the sun with as firm eyes as he .

This matter of marrying his king's daughter ,wherein he must be weighed rather by her value than his own ,words him , I doubt not , a great deal from the matter .

And then , his banishment .

Ay , and the approbation of those that weep this lamentable divorce under her colours are wonderfully to extend him ; be it but to fortify her judgment , which else an easy battery might lay flat , for taking a beggar without less quality . But how comes it , he is to sojourn with you ? How creeps acquaintance ?

His father and I were soldiers together ; to whom I have been often bound for no less than my life . Here comes the Briton : let him be so entertained amongst you as suits , with gentlemen of your knowing , to a stranger of his quality .

I beseech you all , be better known to this gentleman , whom I commend to you , as a noble friend of mine ; how worthy he is I will leave to appear hereafter , rather than story him in his own hearing .

Sir , we have known together in Orleans .

Since when I have been debtor to you for courtesies , which I will be ever to pay and yet pay still .

Sir , you o'er-rate my poor kindness . I was glad I did atone my countryman and you ; it had been pity you should have been put together with so mortal a purpose as then each bore , upon importance of so slight and trivial a nature .

By your pardon , sir , I was then a young traveller ; rather shunned to go even with what I heard than in my every action to be guided by others' experiences ; but , upon my mended judgment ,if I offend not to say it is mended ,my quarrel was not altogether slight .

Faith , yes , to be put to the arbitrement of swords , and by such two that would by all likelihood have confounded one the other , or have fallen both .

Can we , with manners , ask what was the difference ?

Safely , I think . 'Twas a contention in public , which may , without contradiction , suffer the report . It was much like an argument that fell out last night , where each of us fell in praise of our country mistresses ; this gentleman at that time vouching and upon warrant of bloody affirmation his to be more fair , virtuous , wise , chaste , constant , qualified , and less attemptable , than any the rarest of our ladies in France .

That lady is not now living , or this gentleman's opinion by this worn out .

She holds her virtue still and I my mind .

You must not so far prefer her 'fore ours of Italy .

Being so far provoked as I was in France , I would abate her nothing , though I profess myself her adorer , not her friend .

As fair and as good a kind of hand-in-hand comparison had been something too fair and too good for any lady in Britain . If she went before others I have seen , as that diamond of yours outlustres many I have beheld , I could not but believe she excelled many ; but I have not seen the most precious diamond that is , nor you the lady .

I praised her as I rated her ; so do I my stone .

What do you esteem it at ?

More than the world enjoys .

Either your unparagoned mistress is dead , or she's outprized by a trifle .

You are mistaken ; the one may be sold , or given ; or if there were wealth enough for the purchase , or merit for the gift ; the other is not a thing for sale , and only the gift of the gods .

Which the gods have given you ?

Which , by their graces , I will keep .

You may wear her in little yours , but , you know , strange fowl light upon neighbouring ponds . Your ring may be stolen , too ; so your brace of unprizeable estimations , the one is but frail and the other causal ; a cunning thief , or a that way accomplished courtier , would hazard the winning both of first and last .

Your Italy contains none so accomplished a courtier to convince the honour of my mistress , if , in the holding or loss of that , you term her frail . I do nothing doubt you have store of thieves ; notwithstanding I fear not my ring .

Let us leave here , gentlemen .

Sir , with all my heart . This worthy signior , I thank him , makes no stranger of me ; we are familiar at first .

With five times so much conversation I should get ground of your fair mistress , make her go back , even to the yielding , had I admittance and opportunity to friend .

No , no .

I dare thereupon pawn the moiety of my estate to your ring , which , in my opinion , o'ervalues it something ; but I make my wager rather against your confidence than her reputation ; and , to bar your offence herein too , I durst attempt it against any lady in the world .

You are a great deal abused in too bold a persuasion ; and I doubt not you sustain what you're worthy of by your attempt .

What's that ?

A repulse ; though your attempt , as you call it , deserves more ,a punishment too .

Gentlemen , enough of this ; it came in too suddenly ; let it die as it was born , and , I pray you , be better acquainted .

Would I had put my estate and my neighbour's on the approbation of what I have spoke !

What lady would you choose to assail ?

Yours ; whom in constancy you think stands so safe . I will lay you ten thousand ducats to your ring , that , commend me to the court where your lady is , with no more advantage than the opportunity of a second conference , and I will bring from thence that honour of hers which you imagine so reserved .

I will wage against your gold , gold to it : my ring I hold dear as my finger ; 'tis part of it .

You are afraid , and therein the wiser . If you buy ladies' flesh at a million a dram , you cannot preserve it from tainting . But I see you have some religion in you , that you fear .

This is but a custom in your tongue ; you bear a graver purpose , I hope .

I am the master of my speeches , and would undergo what's spoken , I swear .

Will you ? I shall but lend my diamond till your return . Let there be covenants drawn between 's : my mistress exceeds in goodness the hugeness of your unworthy thinking ; I dare you to this match . Here's my ring .

I will have it no lay .

By the gods , it is one . If I bring you no sufficient testimony that I have enjoyed the dearest bodily part of your mistress , my ten thousand ducats are yours ; so is your diamond too : if I come off , and leave her in such honour as you have trust in , she your jewel , this your jewel , and my gold are yours ; provided I have your commendation for my more free entertainment .

I embrace these conditions ; let us have articles betwixt us . Only , thus far you shall answer : if you make your voyage upon her and give me directly to understand that you have prevailed , I am no further your enemy ; she is not worth our debate : if she remain unseduced ,you not making it appear otherwise ,for your ill opinion , and the assault you have made to her chastity , you shall answer me with your sword .

Your hand ; a covenant . We will have these things set down by lawful counsel , and straight away for Britain , lest the bargain should catch cold and starve . I will fetch my gold and have our two wagers recorded .

Agreed .


Will this hold , think you ?

Signior Iachimo will not from it . Pray , let us follow 'em .


Whiles yet the dew 's on ground , gather those flowers :
Make haste ; who has the note of them ?

I , madam .

Dispatch .

Now , Master doctor , have you brought those drugs ?

Pleaseth your highness , ay ; here they are , madam :

But I beseech your Grace , without offence ,
My conscience bids me ask ,wherefore you have 
Commanded of me these most poisonous compounds ,
Which are the movers of a languishing death ,
But though slow , deadly ?

I wonder , doctor ,
Thou ask'st me such a question : have I not been 
Thy pupil long ? Hast thou not learn'd me how 
To make perfumes ? distil ? preserve ? yea , so 
That our great king himself doth woo me oft 
For my confections ? Having thus far proceeded ,
Unless thou think'st me devilish ,is 't not meet 
That I did amplify my judgment in 
Other conclusions ? I will try the forces 
Of these thy compounds on such creatures as 
We count not worth the hanging ,but none human ,
To try the vigour of them and apply 
Allayments to their act , and by them gather 
Their several virtues and effects .

Your highness 
Shall from this practice but make hard your heart ;
Besides , the seeing these effects will be 
Both noisome and infectious .

O ! content thee .


Here comes a flattering rascal ; upon him 
Will I first work : he's for his master ,
And enemy to my son . How now , Pisanio :
Doctor , your service for this time is ended ;

Take your own way .

I do suspect you , madam ;
But you shall do no harm .

Hark thee , a word .

I do not like her . She doth think she has 
Strange lingering poisons ; I do know her spirit ,
And will not trust one of her malice with 
A drug of such damn'd nature . Those she has 
Will stupify and dull the sense awhile ;
Which first , perchance , she'll prove on cats and dogs ,
Then afterward up higher ; but there is 
No danger in what show of death it makes ,
More than the locking-up the spirits a time ,
To be more fresh , reviving . She is fool'd 
With a most false effect ; and I the truer ,
So to be false with her .

No further service , doctor ,
Until I send for thee .

I humbly take my leave .


Weeps she still , sayst thou ? Dost thou think in time 
She will not quench , and let instructions enter 
Where folly now possesses ? Do thou work :
When thou shalt bring me word she loves my son ,
I'll tell thee on the instant thou art then 
As great as is thy master ; greater , for 
His fortunes all lie speechless , and his name 
Is at last gasp ; return he cannot , nor 
Continue where he is ; to shift his being 
Is to exchange one misery with another ,
And every day that comes comes to decay 
A day's work in him . What shalt thou expect ,
To be depender on a thing that leans ,
Who cannot be new built , nor has no friends ,
So much as but to prop him ?

Thou tak'st up 
Thou know'st not what ; but take it for thy labour :
It is a thing I made , which hath the king 
Five times redeem'd from death ; I do not know 
What is more cordial : nay , I prithee , take it ;
It is an earnest of a further good 
That I mean to thee . Tell thy mistress how 
The case stands with her ; do 't as from thyself .
Think what a chance thou changest on , but think 
Thou hast thy mistress still , to boot , my son ,
Who shall take notice of thee . I'll move the king 
To any shape of thy preferment such 
As thou'lt desire ; and then myself , I chiefly ,
That set thee on to this desert , am bound 
To load thy merit richly . Call my women ;
Think on my words .

A sly and constant knave ,
Not to be shak'd ; the agent for his master ,
And the remembrancer of her to hold 
The hand-fast to her lord . I have given him that 
Which , if he take , shall quite unpeople her 
Of leigers for her sweet , and which she after ,
Except she bend her humour , shall be assur'd 
To taste of too .


So , so ;well done , well done .
The violets , cowslips , and the prime-roses 
Bear to my closet . Fare thee well , Pisanio :
Think on my words .

And shall do :
But when to my good lord I prove untrue ,
I'll choke myself ; there's all I'll do for you .


A father cruel , and a step-dame false ;
A foolish suitor to a wedded lady ,
That hath her husband banish'd : O ! that husband ,
My supreme crown of grief ! and those repeated 
Vexations of it ! Had I been thief-stol'n ,
As my two brothers , happy ! but most miserable 
Is the desire that's glorious : bless'd be those ,
How mean so'er , that have their honest wills ,
Which seasons comfort . Who may this be ? Fie !


Madam , a noble gentleman of Rome ,
Comes from my lord with letters .

Change you , madam ?
The worthy Leonatus is in safety ,
And greets your highness dearly .


Thanks , good sir :
You are kindly welcome .

All of her that is out of door most rich !
If she be furnish'd with a mind so rare ,
She is alone the Arabian bird , and I 
Have lost the wager . Boldness be my friend !
Arm me , audacity , from head to foot !
Or , like the Parthian , I shall flying fight ;
Rather , directly fly .

He is one of the noblest note , to whose kindnesses I am most infinitely tied . Reflect upon him accordingly , as you value your truest 
So far I read aloud ;
But even the very middle of my heart 
Is warm'd by the rest , and takes it thankfully .
You are as welcome , worthy sir , as I 
Have words to bid you ; and shall find it so 
In all that I can do .

Thanks , fairest lady .
What ! are men mad ? Hath nature given them eyes 
To see this vaulted arch , and the rich crop 
Of sea and land , which can distinguish 'twixt 
The fiery orbs above and the twinn'd stones 
Upon the number'd beach ? and can we not 
Partition make with spectacles so precious 
'Twixt fair and foul ?

What makes your admiration ?

It cannot be i' the eye ; for apes and monkeys 
'Twixt two such shes would chatter this way and 
Contemn with mows the other ; nor i' the judgment ,
For idiots in this case of favour would 
Be wisely definite ; nor i' the appetite ;
Sluttery to such neat excellence oppos'd 
Should make desire vomit emptiness ,
Not so allur'd to feed .

What is the matter , trow ?

The cloyed will ,
That satiate yet unsatisfied desire , that tub 
Both fill'd and running ,ravening first the lamb ,
Longs after for the garbage .

What , dear sir ,
Thus raps you ? are you well ?

Thanks , madam , well .


Beseech you , sir ,
Desire my man's abode where I did leave him ;
He's strange and peevish .

I was going , sir ,
To give him welcome .


Continues well my lord his health , beseech you ?

Well , madam .

Is he dispos'd to mirth ? I hope he is .

Exceeding pleasant ; none a stranger there 
So merry and so gamesome : he is call'd 
The Briton reveller .

When he was here 
He did incline to sadness , and oft-times 
Not knowing why .

I never saw him sad .
There is a Frenchman his companion , one ,
An eminent monsieur , that , it seems , much loves 
A Gallian girl at home ; he furnaces 
The thick sighs from him , whiles the jolly Briton 
Your lord , I mean laughs from 's free lungs , cries , 'O !
Can my sides hold , to think that man , who knows 
By history , report , or his own proof ,
What woman is , yea , what she cannot choose 
But must be , will his free hours languish for 
Assured bondage ?' 

Will my lord say so ?

Ay , madam , with his eyes in flood with laughter :
It is a recreation to be by 
And hear him mock the Frenchman ; but , heavens know ,
Some men are much to blame .

Not he , I hope .

Not he ; but yet heaven's bounty towards him might 
Be us'd more thankfully . In himself , 'tis much ;
In you ,which I account his beyond all talents ,
Whilst I am bound to wonder , I am bound 
To pity too .

What do you pity , sir ?

Two creatures , heartily .

Am I one , sir ?
You look on me : what wrack discern you in me 
Deserves your pity ?

Lamentable ! What !
To hide me from the radiant sun and solace 
I' the dungeon by a snuff !

I pray you , sir ,
Deliver with more openness your answers 
To my demands . Why do you pity me ?

That others do ,
I was about to say , enjoy your But 
It is an office of the gods to venge it ,
Not mine to speak on 't .

You do seem to know 
Something of me , or what concerns me ; pray you ,
Since doubting things go ill often hurts more 
Than to be sure they do ; for certainties 
Either are past remedies , or , timely knowing ,
The remedy then born ,discover to me 
What both you spur and stop .

Had I this cheek 
To bathe my lips upon ; this hand , whose touch ,
Whose every touch , would force the feeler's soul 
To the oath of loyalty ; this object , which 
Takes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye ,
Firing it only here ; should I damn'd then 
Slaver with lips as common as the stairs 
That mount the Capitol ; join gripes with hands 
Made hard with hourly falsehood ,falsehood , as 
With labour ;then by-peeping in an eye ,
Base and illustrous as the smoky light 
That's fed with stinking tallow ; it were fit 
That all the plagues of hell should at one time 
Encounter such revolt .

My lord , I fear ,
Has forgot Britain .

And himself . Not I ,
Inclin'd to this intelligence , pronounce 
The beggary of his change ; but 'tis your graces 
That from my mutest conscience to my tongue 
Charms this report out .

Let me hear no more .

O dearest soul ! your cause doth strike my heart 
With pity , that doth make me sick . A lady 
So fair ,and fasten'd to an empery 
Would make the great'st king double ,to be partner'd 
With tom-boys hir'd with that self-exhibition 
Which your own coffers yield ! with diseas'd ventures 
That play with all infirmities for gold 
Which rottenness can lend nature ! such boil'd stuff 
As well might poison poison ! Be reveng'd ;
Or she that bore you was no queen , and you 
Recoil from your great stock .

Reveng'd !
How should I be reveng'd ? If this be true ,
As I have such a heart , that both mine ears 
Must not in haste abuse ,if it be true ,
How should I be reveng'd ?

Should be make me 
Live like Diana's priest , betwixt cold sheets ,
Whiles he is vaulting variable ramps ,
In your despite , upon your purse ? Revenge it .
I dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure ,
More noble than that runagate to your bed ,
And will continue fast to your affection ,
Still close as sure .

What ho , Pisanio !

Let me my service tender on your lips .

Away ! I do condemn mine ears that have 
So long attended thee . If thou wert honourable ,
Thou wouldst have told this tale for virtue , not 
For such an end thou seek'st ; as base as strange .
Thou wrong'st a gentleman , who is as far 
From thy report as thou from honour , and 
Solicit'st here a lady that disdains 
Thee and the devil alike . What ho , Pisanio !
The king my father shall be made acquainted 
Of thy assault ; if he shall think it fit ,
A saucy stranger in his court to mart 
As in a Romish stew and to expound 
His beastly mind to us , he hath a court 
He little cares for and a daughter who 
He not respects at all . What ho , Pisanio !

O happy Leonatus ! I may say :
The credit that thy lady hath of thee 
Deserves thy trust , and thy most perfect goodness 
Her assur'd credit . Blessed live you long !
A lady to the worthiest sir that ever 
Country call'd his ; and you his mistress , only 
For the most worthiest fit . Give me your pardon .
I have spoken this , to know if your affiance 
Were deeply rooted , and shall make your lord 
That which he is , new o'er ; and he is one 
The truest manner'd ; such a holy witch 
That he enchants societies into him ;
Half all men's hearts are his .

You make amends .

He sits 'mongst men like a descended god :
He hath a kind of honour sets him off ,
More than a mortal seeming . Be not angry ,
Most mighty princess , that I have adventur'd 
To try your taking of a false report ; which hath 
Honour'd with confirmation your great judgment 
In the election of a sir so rare ,
Which you know cannot err . The love I bear him 
Made me to fan you thus ; but the gods made you ,
Unlike all others , chaffless . Pray , your pardon .

All's well , sir . Take my power i' the court for yours .

My humble thanks . I had almost forget 
To entreat your Grace but in a small request ,
And yet of moment too , for it concerns 
Your lord , myself , and other noble friends ,
Are partners in the business .

Pray , what is 't ?

Some dozen Romans of us and your lord ,
The best feather of our wing , have mingled sums 
To buy a present for the emperor ;
Which I , the factor for the rest , have done 
In France ; 'tis plate of rare device , and jewels 
Of rich and exquisite form ; their values great ;
And I am something curious , being strange ,
To have them in safe stowage . May it please you 
To take them in protection ?

Willingly ;
And pawn mine honour for their safety : since 
My lord hath interest in them , I will keep them 
In my bedchamber .

They are in a trunk ,
Attended by my men ; I will make bold 
To send them to you , only for this night ;
I must aboard to-morrow .

O ! no , no .

Yes , I beseech , or I shall short my word 
By lengthening my return . From Gallia 
I cross'd the seas on purpose and on promise 
To see your Grace .

I thank you for your pains ;
But not away to-morrow !

O ! I must , madam :
Therefore I shall beseech you , if you please 
To greet your lord with writing , do 't to-night :
I have outstood my time , which is material 
To the tender of our present .

I will write .
Send your trunk to me ; it shall safe be kept ,
And truly yielded you . You're very welcome .

Was there ever man had such luck ! when I kissed the jack , upon an up-cast to be hit away ! I had a hundred pound on 't ; and then a whoreson jackanapes must take me up for swearing , as if I borrowed mine oaths of him and might not spend them at my pleasure .

What got he by that ? You have broke his pate with your bowl .

If his wit had been like him that broke it , it would have run all out .

When a gentleman is disposed to swear , it is not for any standers-by to curtail his oaths , ha ?

No , my lord ;

nor crop the ears of them .

Whoreson dog ! I give him satisfaction !
Would he had been one of my rank !

To have smelt like a fool .

I am not vexed more at any thing in the earth . A pox on 't ! I had rather not be so noble as I am . They dare not fight with me because of the queen my mother . Every Jack-slave hath his bellyful of fighting , and I must go up and down like a cock that nobody can match .

You are cock and capon too ; and you crow , cock , with your comb on .

Sayest thou ?

It is not fit your lordship should undertake every companion that you give offence to .

No , I know that ; but it is fit I should commit offence to my inferiors .

Ay , it is fit for your lordship only .

Why , so I say .

Did you hear of a stranger that's come to court to-night ?

A stranger , and I not know on 't !

He's a strange fellow himself , and knows it not .

There's an Italian come ; and 'tis thought , one of Leonatus' friends .

Leonatus ! a banished rascal ; and he's another , whatsoever he be . Who told you of this stranger ?

One of your lordship's pages .

Is it fit I went to look upon him ? Is there no derogation in 't ?

You cannot derogate , my lord .

Not easily , I think .

You are a fool , granted ; therefore your issues , being foolish , do not derogate .

Come , I'll go see this Italian . What I have lost to-day at bowls I'll win to-night of him . Come , go .

I'll attend your lordship .

That such a crafty devil as is his mother 
Should yield the world this ass ! a woman that 
Bears all down with her brain , and this her son 
Cannot take two from twenty for his heart 
And leave eighteen . Alas ! poor princess ,
Thou divine Imogen , what thou endur'st 
Betwixt a father by thy step-dame govern'd ,
A mother hourly coining plots , a wooer 
More hateful than the foul expulsion is 
Of thy dear husband , than that horrid act 
Of the divorce he'd make . The heavens hold firm 
The walls of thy dear honour ; keep unshak'd 
That temple , thy fair mind ; that thou mayst stand ,
To enjoy thy banish'd lord and this great land !


Who's there ? my woman Helen ?

Please you , madam .

What hour is it ?

Almost midnight , madam .

I have read three hours then ; mine eyes are weak ;
Fold down the leaf where I have left ; to bed :
Take not away the taper , leave it burning ,
And if thou canst awake by four o' the clock ,
I prithee , call me . Sleep has seized me wholly .

To your protection I commend me , gods !
From fairies and the tempters of the night 
Guard me , beseech ye !


The crickets sing , and man's o'erlabour'd sense 
Repairs itself by rest . Our Tarquin thus 
Did softly press the rushes ere he waken'd 
The chastity he wounded . Cytherea ,
How bravely thou becom'st thy bed ! freshlily ,
And whiter than the sheets ! That I might touch !
But kiss : one kiss ! Rubies unparagon'd ,
How dearly they do 't ! 'Tis her breathing that 
Perfumes the chamber thus ; the flame of the taper 
Bows toward her , and would under-peep her lids ,
To see the enclosed lights , now canopied 
Under these windows , white and azure lac'd 
With blue of heaven's own tinct . But my design ,
To note the chamber : I will write all down :
Such and such pictures ; there the window ; such 
Th' adornment of her bed ; the arras , figures ,
Why , such and such ; and the contents o' the story .
Ah ! but some natural notes about her body ,
Above ten thousand meaner moveables 
Would testify , to enrich mine inventory .
O sleep ! thou ape of death , lie dull upon her ;
And be her senses but as a monument 
Thus in a chapel lying . Come off , come off ;

As slippery as the Gordian knot was hard !
'Tis mine ; and this will witness outwardly ,
As strongly as the conscience does within ,
To the madding of her lord . On her left breast 
A mole cinque-spotted , like the crimson drops 
I' the bottom of a cowslip : here's a voucher ;
Stronger than ever law could make : this secret 
Will force him think I have pick'd the lock and ta'en 
The treasure of her honour . No more . To what end ?
Why should I write this down , that's riveted ,
Screw'd to my memory ? She hath been reading late 
The tale of Tereus ; here the leaf's turn'd down 
Where Philomel gave up . I have enough :
To the trunk again , and shut the spring of it .
Swift , swift , you dragons of the night , that dawning 
May bare the raven's eye ! I lodge in fear ;
Though this a heavenly angel , hell is here .

One , two , three : time , time !


Your lordship is the most patient man in loss , the most coldest that ever turned up ace .

It would make any man cold to lose .

But not every man patient after the noble temper of your lordship . You are most hot and furious when you win .

Winning will put any man into courage .
If I could get this foolish Imogen , I should have gold enough . It's almost morning , is 't not ?

Day , my lord .

I would this music would come . I am advised to give her music o' mornings ; they say it will penetrate .


Come on ; tune . If you can penetrate her with your fingering , so ; we'll try with tongue too : if none will do , let her remain ; but I'll never give o'er . First , a very excellent good-conceited thing ; after , a wonderful sweet air , with admirable rich words to it : and then let her consider .


Hark ! hark ! the lark at heaven's gate sings ,
And Ph bus 'gins arise ,
His steeds to water at those springs 
On chalic'd flowers that lies ,
And winking Mary-buds begin 
To ope their golden eyes :
With every thing that pretty is ,
My lady sweet , arise .
Arise , arise !


So , get you gone . If this penetrate , I will consider your music the better ; if it do not , it is a vice in her ears , which horse-hairs and calves'-guts , nor the voice of unpaved eunuch to boot , can never amend .

Here comes the king .

I am glad I was up so late , for that's the reason I was up so early ; he cannot choose but take this service I have done fatherly .

Good morrow to your majesty and to my gracious mother .

Attend you here the door of our stern daughter ?
Will she not forth ?

I have assail'd her with musics , but she vouchsafes no notice .

The exile of her minion is too new ,
She hath not yet forgot him ; some more time 
Must wear the print of his remembrance out ,
And then she's yours .

You are most bound to the king ,
Who lets go by no vantages that may 
Prefer you to his daughter . Frame yourself 
To orderly soliciting , and be friended 
With aptness of the season ; make denials 
Increase your services ; so seem as if 
You were inspir'd to do those duties which 
You tender to her ; that you in all obey her 
Save when command to your dismission tends ,
And therein you are senseless .

Senseless ! not so .


So like you , sir , ambassadors from Rome ;
The one is Caius Lucius .

A worthy fellow ,
Albeit he comes on angry purpose now ;
But that's no fault of his : we must receive him 
According to the honour of his sender ;
And towards himself , his goodness forespent on us ,
We must extend our notice . Our dear son ,
When you have given good morning to your mistress ,
Attend the queen and us ; we shall have need 
To employ you towards this Roman . Come , our queen .


If she be up , I'll speak with her ; if not ,
Let her lie still , and dream . By your leave , ho !

I know her women are about her . What 
If I do line one of their hands ? 'Tis gold 
Which buys admittance ; oft it doth ; yea , and makes 
Diana's rangers false themselves , yield up 
Their deer to the stand o' the stealer ; and 'tis gold 
Which makes the true man kill'd and saves the thief ;
Nay , sometime hangs both thief and true man . What 
Can it not do and undo ? I will make 
One of her women lawyer to me , for 
I yet not understand the case myself .
By your leave .

Who's there , that knocks ?

A gentleman .

No more ?

Yes , and a gentlewoman's son .

That's more 
Than some whose tailors are as dear as yours 
Can justly boast of . What's your lordship's pleasure ?

Your lady's person : is she ready ?

Ay ,
To keep her chamber .

There's gold for you ; sell me your good report .

How ! my good name ? or to report of you 
What I shall think is good ?The princess !


Good morrow , fairest ; sister , your sweet hand .


Good morrow , sir . You lay out too much pains 
For purchasing but trouble ; the thanks I give 
Is telling you that I am poor of thanks 
And scarce can spare them .

Still , I swear I love you .

If you but said so , 'twere as deep with me :
If you swear still , your recompense is still 
That I regard it not .

This is no answer .

But that you shall not say I yield being silent 
I would not speak . I pray you , spare me : faith ,
I shall unfold equal discourtesy 
To your best kindness . One of your great knowing 
Should learn , being taught , forbearance .

To leave you in your madness , 'twere my sin :
I will not .

Fools cure not mad folks .

Do you call me fool ?

As I am mad , I do :
If you'll be patient , I'll no more be mad ;
That cures us both . I am much sorry , sir ,
You put me to forget a lady's manners ,
By being so verbal ; and learn now , for all ,
That I , which know my heart , do here pronounce 
By the very truth of it , I care not for you ;
And am so near the lack of charity ,
To accuse myself ,I hate you ; which I had rather 
You felt than make 't my boast .

You sin against 
Obedience , which you owe your father . For 
The contract you pretend with that base wretch ,
One bred of alms and foster'd with cold dishes ,
With scraps o' the court , it is no contract , none ;
And though it be allow'd in meaner parties 
Yet who than he more mean ?to knit their souls 
On whom there is no more dependancy 
But brats and beggary in self-figur'd knot ;
Yet you are curb'd from that enlargement by 
The consequence o' the crown , and must not soil 
The precious note of it with a base slave ,
A hilding for a livery , a squire's cloth ,
A pantler , not so eminent .

Profane fellow !
Wert thou the son of Jupiter , and no more 
But what thou art besides , thou wert too base 
To be his groom ; thou wert dignified enough ,
Even to the point of envy , if 'twere made 
Comparative for your virtues , to be styl'd 
The under-hangman of his kingdom , and hated 
For being preferr'd so well .

The south-fog rot him !

He never can meet more mischance than come 
To be but nam'd of thee . His meanest garment 
That ever hath but clipp'd his body , is dearer 
In my respect than all the hairs above thee ,
Were they all made such men . How now , Pisanio !


'His garment !' Now , the devil 

To Dorothy my woman hie thee presently ,

'His garment !' 

I am sprighted with a fool ,
Frighted , and anger'd worse . Go , bid my woman 
Search for a jewel that too casually 
Hath left mine arm ; it was thy master's , 'shrew me 
If I would lose it for a revenue 
Of any king's in Europe . I do think 
I saw 't this morning ; confident I am 
Last night 'twas on mine arm , I kiss'd it ;
I hope it be not gone to tell my lord 
That I kiss aught but he .

'Twill not be lost .

I hope so ; go , and search .


You have abus'd me :
'His meanest garment !' 

Ay , I said so , sir :
If you will make 't an action , call witness to 't .

I will inform your father .

Your mother too :
She's my good lady , and will conceive , I hope ,
But the worst of me . So I leave you , sir ,
To the worst of discontent .


I'll be reveng'd .
'His meanest garment !' Well .


Fear it not , sir ; I would I were so sure 
To win the king as I am bold her honour 
Will remain hers .

What means do you make to him ?

Not any , but abide the change of time ,
Quake in the present winter's state and wish 
That warmer days would come ; in these sear'd hopes ,
I barely gratify your love ; they failing ,
I must die much your debtor .

Your very goodness and your company 
O'erpays all I can do . By this , your king 
Hath heard of great Augustus ; Caius Lucius 
Will do 's commission throughly , and I think 
He'll grant the tribute , send the arrearages ,
Or look upon our Romans , whose remembrance 
Is yet fresh in their grief .

I do believe 
Statist though I am none , nor like to be 
That this will prove a war ; and you shall hear 
The legions now in Gallia sooner landed 
In our not-fearing Britain , than have tidings 
Of any penny tribute paid . Our countrymen 
Are men more order'd than when Julius C sar 
Smil'd at their lack of skill , but found their courage 
Worthy his frowning at : their discipline ,
Now winged ,with their courage will make known 
To their approvers they are people such 
That mend upon the world .

See ! Iachimo !


The swiftest harts have posted you by land ,
And winds of all the corners kiss'd your sails ,
To make your vessel nimble .

Welcome , sir .

I hope the briefness of your answer made 
The speediness of your return .

Your lady 
Is one of the fairest that I have look'd upon .

And therewithal the best ; or let her beauty 
Look through a casement to allure false hearts 
And be false with them .

Here are letters for you .

Their tenour good , I trust .

'Tis very like .

Was Caius Lucius in the Britain court 
When you were there ?

He was expected then ,
But not approach'd .

All is well yet .
Sparkles this stone as it was wont ? or is't not 
Too dull for your good wearing ?

If I have lost it ,
I should have lost the worth of it in gold .
I'll make a journey twice as far to enjoy 
A second night of such sweet shortness which 
Was mine in Britain ; for the ring is won .

The stone's too hard to come by .

Not a whit ,
Your lady being so easy .

Make not , sir ,
Your loss your sport : I hope you know that we 
Must not continue friends .

Good sir , we must ,
If you keep covenant . Had I not brought 
The knowledge of your mistress home , I grant 
We were to question further , but I now 
Profess myself the winner of her honour ,
Together with your ring ; and not the wronger 
Of her or you , having proceeded but 
By both your wills .

If you can make 't apparent 
That you have tasted her in bed , my hand 
And ring is yours ; if not , the foul opinion 
You had of her pure honour gains or loses 
Your sword or mine or masterless leaves both 
To who shall find them .

Sir , my circumstances 
Being so near the truth as I will make them ,
Must first induce you to believe : whose strength 
I will confirm with oath ; which , I doubt not ,
You'll give me leave to spare , when you shall find 
You need it not .

Proceed .

First , her bedchamber ,
Where I confess I slept not , but profess 
Had that was well worth watching ,it was hang'd 
With tapestry of silk and silver ; the story 
Proud Cleopatra , when she met her Roman ,
And Cydnus swell'd above the banks , or for 
The press of boats or pride ; a piece of work 
So bravely done , so rich , that it did strive 
In workmanship and value ; which I wonder'd 
Could be rarely and exactly wrought ,
Since the true life on 't was 

This is true ;
And this you might have heard of here , by me ,
Or by some other .

More particulars 
Must justify my knowledge .

So they must ,
Or do your honour injury .

The chimney 
Is south the chamber , and the chimney-piece 
Chaste Dian bathing ; never saw I figures 
So likely to report themselves ; the cutter 
Was as another nature , dumb ; outwent her ,
Motion and breath left out .

This is a thing 
Which you might from relation likewise reap ,
Being , as it is , much spoke of .

The roof o' the chamber 
With golden cherubins is fretted ; her andirons 
I had forgot them were two winking Cupids 
Of silver , each on one foot standing , nicely 
Depending on their brands .

This is her honour !
Let it be granted you have seen all this ,and praise 
Be given to your remembrance ,the description 
Of what is in her chamber nothing saves 
The wager you have laid .

Then , if you can ,
Be pale : I beg but leave to air this jewel ; see !

And now 'tis up again ; it must be married 
To that your diamond ; I'll keep them .

Jove !
Once more let me behold it . Is it that 
Which I left with her ?

Sir ,I thank her ,that :
She stripp'd it from her arm ; I see her yet ;
Her pretty action did outsell her gift ,
And yet enrich'd it too . She gave it me , and said 
She priz'd it once .

May be she pluck'd it off 
To send it me .

She writes so to you , doth she ?

O ! no , no , no , 'tis true . Here , take this too ;

It is a basilisk unto mine eye ,
Kills me to look on 't . Let there be no honour 
Where there is beauty ; truth where semblance ; love 
Where there's another man ; the vows of women 
Of no more bondage be to where they are made 
Than they are to their virtues , which is nothing .
O ! above measure false .

Have patience , sir ,
And take your ring again ; 'tis not yet won :
It may be probable she lost it ; or 
Who knows if one of her women , being corrupted ,
Hath stol'n it from her ?

Very true ;
And so I hope he came by 't . Back my ring .
Render to me some corporal sign about her ,
More evident than this ; for this was stol'n .

By Jupiter , I had it from her arm .

Hark you , he swears ; by Jupiter he swears .
'Tis true ; nay , keep the ring ; 'tis true : I am sure 
She would not lose it ; her attendants are 
All sworn and honourable ; they induc'd to steal it !
And by a stranger ! No , he hath enjoy'd her ;
The cognizance of her incontinency 
Is this ; she hath bought the name of whore thus dearly .
There , take thy hire ; and all the fiends of hell 
Divide themselves between you !

Sir , be patient :
This is not strong enough to be believ'd 
Of one persuaded well of 

Never talk on 't ;
She hath been colted by him .

If you seek 
For further satisfying , under her breast ,
Worthy the pressing , lies a mole , right proud 
Of that most delicate lodging : by my life ,
I kiss'd it , and it gave me present hunger 
To feed again , though full . You do remember 
This stain upon her ?

Ay , and it doth confirm 
Another stain , as big as hell can hold ,
Were there no more but it .

Will you hear more ?

Spare your arithmetic ; never count the turns ;
Once , and a million !

I'll be sworn ,

No swearing .
If you will swear you have not done 't , you lie ;
And I will kill thee if thou dost deny 
Thou'st made me cuckold .

I'll deny nothing .

O ! that I had her here , to tear her limb-meal .
I will go there and do 't , i' the court , before 
Her father . I'll do something 


Quite besides 
The government of patience ! You have won :
Let's follow him , and pervert the present wrath 
He hath against himself .

With all my heart .


Is there no way for men to be , but women 
Must be half-workers ? We are all bastards ; all ,
And that most venerable man which I 
Did call my father was I know not where 
When I was stamp'd ; some coiner with his tools 
Made me a counterfeit ; yet my mother seem'd 
The Dian of that time ; so doth my wife 
The nonpareil of this . O ! vengeance , vengeance ;
Me of my lawful pleasure she restrain'd 
And pray'd me oft forbearance ; did it with 
A pudency so rosy the sweet view on 't 
Might well have warm'd old Saturn ; that I thought her 
As chaste as unsunn'd snow . O ! all the devils !
This yellow Iachimo , in an hour ,was 't not ?
Or less at first ?perchance he spoke not , but 
Like a full-acorn'd boar , a German one ,
Cried 'O !' and mounted ; found no opposition 
But what he look'd for should oppose and she 
Should from encounter guard . Could I find out 
The woman's part in me ! For there's no motion 
That tends to vice in man but I affirm 
It is the woman's part ; be it lying , note it ,
The woman's ; flattering , hers ; deceiving , hers ;
Lust and rank thoughts , hers , hers ; revenges , hers ;
Ambitions , covetings , change of prides , disdain ,
Nice longing , slanders , mutability ,
All faults that man may name , nay , that hell knows ,
Why , hers , in part , or all ; but rather , all ;
For even to vice 
They are not constant , but are changing still 
One vice but of a minute old for one 
Not half so old as that . I'll write against them ,
Detest them , curse them . Yet 'tis greater skill 
In a true hate to pray they have their will :
The very devils cannot plague them better .

Now say what would Augustus C sar with us ?

When Julius C sar whose remembrance yet 
Lives in men's eyes , and will to ears and tongues 
Be theme and hearing ever was in this Britain ,
And conquer'd it , Cassibelan , thine uncle ,
Famous in C sar's praises , no whit less 
Than in his feats deserving it ,for him 
And his succession , granted Rome a tribute ,
Yearly three thousand pounds , which by thee lately 
Is left untender'd .

And , to kill the marvel ,
Shall be so ever .

There be many C sars 
Ere such another Julius . Britain is 
A world by itself , and we will nothing pay 
For wearing our own noses .

That opportunity ,
Which then they had to take from 's , to resume ,
We have again . Remember , sir , my liege ,
The kings your ancestors , together with 
The natural bravery of your isle , which stands 
As Neptune's park , ribbed and paled in 
With rocks unscaleable and roaring waters ,
With sands , that will not bear your enemies' boats ,
But suck them up to the topmast . A kind of conquest 
C sar made here , but made not here his brag 
Of 'came , and saw , and overcame :' with shame 
The first that ever touch'd him he was carried 
From off our coast , twice beaten ; and his shipping 
Poor ignorant baubles !on our terrible seas ,
Like egg-shells mov'd upon their surges , crack'd 
As easily 'gainst our rocks : for joy whereof 
The fam'd Cassibelan , who was once at point 
O giglot fortune !to master C sar's sword ,
Made Lud's town with rejoicing-fires bright ,
And Britons stiut with courage .

Come , there's no more tribute to be paid . Our kingdom is stronger than it was at that time ; and , as I said , there is no moe such C sars ; other of them may have crooked noses , but to owe such straight arms , none .

Son , let your mother end .

We have yet many among us can gripe as hard as Cassibelan ; I do not say I am one , but I have a hand . Why tribute ? why should we pay tribute ? If C sar can hide the sun from us with a blanket , or put the moon in his pocket , we will pay him tribute for light ; else , sir , no more tribute , pray you now .

You must know ,
Till the injurious Romans did extort 
This tribute from us , we were free ; C sar's ambition 
Which swell'd so much that it did almost stretch 
The sides o' the world against all colour here 
Did put the yoke upon 's ; which to shake off 
Becomes a war-like people , whom we reckon 
Ourselves to be . We do say then to C sar 
Our ancestor was that Mulmutius which 
Ordain'd our laws , whose use the sword of C sar 
Hath too much mangled ; whose repair and franchise 
Shall , by the power we hold , be our good deed ,
Though Rome be therefore angry . Mulmutius made our laws ,
Who was the first of Britain which did put 
His brows within a golden crown , and call'd 
Himself a king .

I am sorry , Cymbeline ,
That I am to pronounce Augustus C sar 
C sar , that hath more kings his servants than 
Thyself domestic officers thine enemy .
Receive it from me , then : war and confusion 
In C sar's name pronounce I 'gainst thee : look 
For fury not to be resisted . Thus defied ,
I thank thee for myself .

Thou art welcome , Caius .
Thy C sar knighted me ; my youth I spent 
Much under him ; of him I gather'd honour ;
Which he , to seek of me again , perforce ,
Behoves me keep at utterance . I am perfect 
That the Pannonians and Dalmatians for 
Their liberties are now in arms ; a precedent 
Which not to read would show the Britons cold :
So C sar shall not find them .

Let proof speak .

His majesty bids you welcome . Make pastime with us a day or two , or longer ; if you seek us afterwards in other terms , you shall find us in our salt-water girdle ; if you beat us out of it , it is yours ; if you fall in the adventure , our crows shall fare the better for you ; and there's an end .

So , sir .

I know your master's pleasure and he mine :
All the remain is 'Welcome !' 


How ! of adultery ! Wherefore write you not 
What monster's her accuser ? Leonatus !
O master ! what a strange infection 
Is fall'n into thy ear ! What false Italian 
As poisonous-tongu'd as handed hath prevail'd 
On thy too ready hearing ? Disloyal ! No :
She's punish'd for her truth , and undergoes ,
More goddess-like than wife-like , such assaults 
As would take in some virtue . O my master !
Thy mind to her is now as low as were 
Thy fortunes . How ! that I should murder her ?
Upon the love and truth and vows which I 
Have made to thy command ? I , her ? her blood ?
If it be so to do good service , never 
Let me be counted serviceable . How look I ,
That I should seem to lack humanity 
So much as this fact comes to ?Do't : the letter 
That I have sent her by her own command 
Shall give thee opportunity :O damn'd paper !
Black as the ink that's on thee . Senseless bauble ,
Art thou a feodary for this act , and look'st 
So virgin-like without ? Lo ! here she comes .
I am ignorant in what I am commanded .


How now , Pisanio !

Madam , here is a letter from my lord .

Who ? thy lord ? that is my lord , Leonatus .
O ! learn'd indeed were that astronomer 
That knew the stars as I his characters ;
He'd lay the future open . You good gods ,
Let what is here contain'd relish of love ,
Of my lord's health , of his content , yet not 
That we two are asunder ; let that grieve him ,
Some griefs are med'cinable ; that is one of them ,
For it doth physic love ,of his content ,
All but in that ! Good wax , thy leave . Bless'd be 
You bees that make these locks of counsel ! Lovers 
And men in dangerous bonds pray not alike ;
Though forfeiters you cast in prison , yet 
You clasp young Cupid's tables . Good news , gods !
Justice , and your father's wrath , should he take me in his dominion , could not be so cruel to me , as you , O the dearest of creatures , would not even renew me with your eyes . Take notice that I am in Cambria , at Milford-Haven ; what your own love will out of this advise you , follow . So , he wishes you all happiness , that remains loyal to his vow , and your , increasing in love ,
O ! for a horse with wings ! Hear'st thou , Pisanio ?
He is at Milford-Haven ; read , and tell me 
How far 'tis thither . If one of mean affairs 
May plod it in a week , why may not I 
Glide thither in a day ? Then , true Pisanio ,
Who long'st , like me , to see thy lord ; who long'st ,
O ! let me 'bate ,but not like me ; yet long'st ,
But in a fainter kind :O ! not like me ,
For mine's beyond beyond ; say , and speak thick ;
Love's counsellor should fill the bores of hearing ,
To the smothering of the sense ,how far it is 
To this same blessed Milford ; and , by the way ,
Tell me how Wales was made so happy as 
T' inherit such a haven ; but , first of all ,
How we may steal from hence , and , for the gap 
That we shall make in time , from our hencegoing 
And our return , to excuse ; but first , how get hence .
Why should excuse be born or ere begot ?
We'll talk of that hereafter . Prithee , speak ,
How many score of miles may we well ride 
'Twixt hour and hour ?

One score 'twixt sun and sun ,
Madam , 's enough for you , and too much too .

Why , one that rode to 's execution , man ,
Could never go so slow : I have heard of riding wagers ,
Where horses have been nimbler than the sands 
That run i' the clock's behalf . But this is foolery ;
Go bid my woman feign a sickness ; say 
She'll home to her father ; and provide me presently 
A riding-suit , no costlier than would fit 
A franklin's housewife .

Madam , you're best consider .

I see before me , man ; nor here , nor here ,
Nor what ensues , but have a fog in them ,
That I cannot look through . Away , I prithee ;
Do as I bid thee . There's no more to say ;
Accessible is none but Milford way .


A goodly day not to keep house , with such 
Whose roof's as low as ours ! Stoop , boys ; this gate 
Instructs you how to adore the heavens , and bows you 
To a morning's holy office ; the gates of monarchs 
Are arch'd so high that giants may jet through 
And keep their impious turbans on , without 
Good morrow to the sun . Hail , thou fair heaven !
We house i' the rock , yet use thee not so hardly 
As prouder livers do .

Hail , heaven !

Hail , heaven !

Now for our mountain sport . Up to yond hill ;
Your legs are young ; I'll tread these flats . Consider ,
When you above perceive me like a crow ,
That it is place which lessens and sets off ;
And you may then revolve what tales I have told you 
Of courts , of princes , of the tricks in war ;
This service is not service , so being done ,
But being so allow'd ; to apprehend thus 
Draws us a profit from all things we see ,
And often , to our comfort , shall we find 
The sharded beetle in a safer hold 
Than is the full wing'd eagle . O ! this life 
Is nobler than attending for a check ,
Richer than doing nothing for a bribe ,
Prouder than rustling in unpaid-for silk ;
Such gain the cap of him that makes 'em fine ,
Yet keeps his book uncross'd ; no life to ours .

Out of your proof you speak ; we , poor unfledg'd ,
Have never wing'd from view o' the nest , nor know not 
What air's from home . Haply this life is best ,
If quiet life be best ; sweeter to you 
That have a sharper known , well corresponding 
With your stiff age ; but unto us it is 
A cell of ignorance , travelling a-bed ,
A prison for a debtor , that not dares 
To stride a limit .

What should we speak of 
When we are old as you ? when we shall hear 
The rain and wind beat dark December , how 
In this our pinching cave shall we discourse 
The freezing hours away ? We have seen nothing ;
We are beastly , subtle as the fox for prey ,
Like war-like as the wolf for what we eat ;
Our valour is to chase what flies ; our cage 
We make a quire , as doth the prison'd bird ,
And sing our bondage freely .

How you speak !
Did you but know the city's usuries 
And felt them knowingly ; the art o' the court ,
As hard to leave as keep , whose top to climb 
Is certain falling , or so slippery that 
The fear's as bad as falling ; the toil of the war ,
A pain that only seems to seek out danger 
I' the name of fame and honour ; which dies i' the search ,
And hath as oft a slanderous epitaph 
As record of fair act ; nay , many times ,
Doth ill deserve by doing well ; what's worse ,
Must curtsy at the censure : O boys ! this story 
The world may read in me ; my body's mark'd 
With Roman swords , and my report was once 
First with the best of note ; Cymbeline lov'd me ,
And when a soldier was the theme , my name 
Was not far off ; then was I as a tree 
Whose boughs did bend with fruit , but , in one night ,
A storm or robbery , call it what you will ,
Shook down my mellow hangings , nay , my leaves ,
And left me bare to weather .

Uncertain favour !

My fault being nothing ,as I have told you oft ,
But that two villains , whose false oaths prevail'd 
Before my perfect honour , swore to Cymbeline 
I was confederate with the Romans ; so 
Follow'd my banishment , and this twenty years 
This rock and these demesnes have been my world ,
Where I have liv'd at honest freedom , paid 
More pious debts to heaven than in all 
The fore-end of my time . But , up to the mountains !
This is not hunter's language . He that strikes 
The venison first shall be the lord o' the feast ;
To him the other two shall minister ;
And we will fear no poison which attends 
In place of greater state . I'll meet you in the valleys .

How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature !
These boys know little they are sons to the king ;
Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive .
They think they are mine ; and , though train'd up thus meanly 
I' the cave wherein they bow , their thoughts do hit 
The roofs of palaces , and nature prompts them 
In simple and low things to prince it much 
Beyond the trick of others . This Polydore ,
The heir of Cymbeline and Britain , who 
The king his father call'd Guiderius ,Jove !
When on my three-foot stool I sit and tell 
The war-like feats I have done , his spirits fly out 
Into my story : say , 'Thus mine enemy fell ,
And thus I set my foot on 's neck ;' even then 
The princely blood flows in his cheek , he sweats ,
Strains his young nerves , and puts himself in posture 
That acts my words . The younger brother , Cadwal ,
Once Arviragus ,in as like a figure ,
Strikes life into my speech and shows much more 
His own conceiving . Hark ! the game is rous'd .
O Cymbeline ! heaven and my conscience knows 
Thou didst unjustly banish me ; whereon ,
At three and two years old , I stole these babes ,
Thinking to bar thee of succession , as 
Thou reft'st me of my lands . Euriphile ,
Thou wast their nurse ; they took thee for their mother ,
And every day do honour to her grave :
Myself , Belarius , that am Morgan call'd ,
They take for natural father . The game is up .


Thou told'st me , when we came from horse , the place 
Was near at hand : ne'er long'd my mother so 
To see me first , as I have now . Pisanio ! man !
Where is Posthumus ? What is in thy mind ,
That makes thee stare thus ? Wherefore breaks that sigh 
From the inward of thee ? One , but painted thus ,
Would be interpreted a thing perplex'd 
Beyond self-explication ; put thyself 
Into a haviour of less fear , ere wildness 
Vanquish my staider senses . What's the matter ?
Why tender'st thou that paper to me with 
A look untender ? If 't be summer news ,
Smile to 't before ; if winterly , thou need'st 
But keep that count'nance still . My husband's hand !
That drug-damn'd Italy hath out-craftied him ,
And he's at some hard point . Speak , man ; thy tongue 
May take off some extremity , which to read 
Would be even mortal to me .

Please you , read ;
And you shall find me , wretched man , a thing 
The most disdain'd of fortune .

Thy mistress , Pisanio , hath played the strumpet in my bed ; the testimonies whereof lie bleeding in me . I speak not out of weak surmises , but from proof as strong as my grief and as certain as I expect my revenge . That part thou , Pisanio , must act for me , if thy faith be not tainted with the breach of hers . Let thine own hands take away her life ; I shall give thee opportunity at Milford-Haven ; she hath my letter for the purpose ; where , if thou fear to strike , and to make me certain it is done , thou art the pandar to her dishonour and equally to me disloyal .

What shall I need to draw my sword ? the paper 
Hath cut her throat already . No , 'tis slander ,
Whose edge is sharper than the sword , whose tongue 
Outvenoms all the worms of Nile , whose breath 
Rides on the posting winds and doth belie 
All corners of the world ; kings , queens , and states ,
Maids , matrons , nay , the secrets of the grave 
This viperous slander enters . What cheer , madam ?

False to his bed ! What is it to be false ?
To lie in watch there and to think on him ?
To weep 'twixt clock and clock ? if sleep charge nature ,
To break it with a fearful dream of him ,
And cry myself awake ? that's false to 's bed , is it ?

Alas ! good lady .

I false ! Thy conscience witness ! Iachimo ,
Thou didst accuse him of incontinency ;
Thou then look'dst like a villain ; now methinks 
Thy favour's good enough . Some jay of Italy ,
Whose mother was her painting , hath betray'd him :
Poor I am stale , a garment out of fashion ,
And , for I am richer than to hang by the walls ,
I must be ripp'd ; to pieces with me ! O !
Men's vows are women's traitors ! All good seeming ,
By thy revolt , O husband ! shall be thought 
Put on for villany ; not born where 't grows ,
But worn a bait for ladies .

Good madam , hear me .

True honest men being heard , like false  neas ,
Were in his time thought false , and Sinon's weeping 
Did scandal many a holy tear , took pity 
From most true wretchedness ; so thou , Posthumus ,
Wilt lay the leaven on all proper men ;
Goodly and gallant shall be false and perjur'd 
From thy great fail . Come , fellow , be thou honest ;
Do thou thy master's bidding . When thou seest him ,
A little witness my obedience ; look !
I draw the sword myself ; take it , and hit 
The innocent mansion of my love , my heart .
Fear not , 'tis empty of all things but grief ;
Thy master is not there , who was indeed 
The riches of it : do his bidding ; strike .
Thou mayst be valiant in a better cause ,
But now thou seem'st a coward .

Hence , vile instrument !
Thou shalt not damn my hand .

Why , I must die ;
And if I do not by thy hand , thou art 
No servant of thy master's . Against self-slaughter 
There is a prohibition so divine 
That cravens my weak hand . Come , here's my heart .
Something's afore 't ; soft , soft ! we'll no defence ;
Obedient as the scabbard . What is here ?
The scriptures of the loyal Leonatus 
All turn'd to heresy ! Away , away !
Corrupters of my faith ; you shall no more 
Be stomachers to my heart . Thus may poor fools 
Believe false teachers ; though those that are betray'd 
Do feel the treason sharply , yet the traitor 
Stands in worse case of woe .
And thou , Posthumus , thou that didst set up 
My disobedience 'gainst the king my father ,
And make me put into contempt the suits 
Of princely fellows , shalt hereafter find 
It is no act of common passage , but 
A strain of rareness ; and I grieve myself 
To think , when thou shalt be disedg'd by her 
That now thou tir'st on , how thy memory 
Will then be pang'd by me . Prithee , dispatch ;
The lamb entreats the butcher ; where's thy knife ?
Thou art too slow to do thy master's bidding ,
When I desire it too .

O , gracious lady !
Since I receiv'd command to do this business 
I have not slept one wink .

Do 't , and to bed then .

I'll wake mine eyeballs blind first .

Wherefore then 
Didst undertake it ? Why hast thou abus'd 
So many miles with a pretence ? this place ?
Mine action and thine own ? our horses' labour ?
The time inviting thee ? the perturb'd court ,
For my being absent ?whereunto I never 
Purpose return .Why hast thou gone so far ,
To be unbent when thou hast ta'en thy stand ,
The elected deer before thee ?

But to win time 
To lose so bad employment , in the which 
I have consider'd of a course . Good lady ,
Hear me with patience .

Talk thy tongue weary ; speak :
I have heard I am a strumpet , and mine ear ,
Therein false struck , can take no greater wound ,
Nor tent to bottom that . But speak .

Then , madam ,
I thought you would not back again .

Most like ,
Bringing me here to kill me .

Not so , neither ;
But if I were as wise as honest , then 
My purpose would prove well . It cannot be 
But that my master is abus'd ; some villain ,
Some villain , ay , and singular in his art ,
Hath done you both this cursed injury .

Some Roman courtezan .

No , on my life .
I'll give but notice you are dead and send him 
Some bloody sign of it ; for 'tis commanded 
I should do so : you shall be miss'd at court ,
And that will well confirm it .

Why , good fellow ,
What shall I do the while ? where bide ? how live ?
Or in my life what comfort , when I am 
Dead to my husband ?

If you'll back to the court ,

No court , no father ; nor no more ado 
With that harsh , noble , simple nothing Cloten !
That Cloten , whose love-suit hath been to me 
As fearful as a siege .

If not at court ,
Then not in Britain must you bide .

Where then ?
Hath Britain all the sun that shines ? Day , night ,
Are they not but in Britain ? I' the world's volume 
Our Britain seems as of it , but not in 't ;
In a great pool a swan's nest : prithee , think 
There's livers out of Britain .

I am most glad 
You think of other place . The ambassador ,
Lucius the Roman , comes to Milford-Haven 
To-morrow ; now , if you could wear a mind 
Dark as your fortune is , and but disguise 
That which , t' appear itself , must not yet be 
But by self-danger , you should tread a course 
Pretty , and full of view ; yea , haply , near 
The residence of Posthumus ; so nigh at least 
That though his actions were not visible , yet 
Report should render him hourly to your ear 
As truly as he moves .

O ! for such means :
Though peril to my modesty , not death on 't ,
I would adventure .

Well , then , here's the point :
You must forget to be a woman ; change 
Command into obedience ; fear and niceness 
The handmaids of all women , or more truly 
Woman it pretty self into a waggish courage ;
Ready in gibes , quick-answer'd , saucy , and 
As quarrelous as the weasel ; nay , you must 
Forget that rarest treasure of your cheek ,
Exposing it but , O ! the harder heart ,
Alack ! no remedy to the greedy touch 
Of common-kissing Titan , and forget 
Your laboursome and dainty trims , wherein 
You made great Juno angry .

Nay , be brief :
I see into thy end , and am almost 
A man already .

First , make yourself but like one .
Forethinking this , I have already fit 
'Tis in my cloak-bag doublet , hat , hose , all 
That answer to them ; would you in their serving ,
And with what imitation you can borrow 
From youth of such a season , 'fore noble Lucius 
Present yourself , desire his service , tell him 
Wherein you are happy ,which you'll make him know ,
If that his head have ear in music ,doubtless 
With joy he will embrace you , for he's honourable ,
And , doubling that , most holy . Your means abroad ,
You have me , rich ; and I will never fail 
Beginning nor supplyment .

Thou art all the comfort 
The gods will diet me with . Prithee , away ;
There's more to be consider'd , but we'll even 
All that good time will give us ; this attempt 
I'm soldier to , and will abide it with 
A prince's courage . Away , I prithee .

Well , madam , we must take a short farewell ,
Lest , being miss'd , I be suspected of 
Your carriage from the court . My noble mistress ,
Here is a box , I had it from the queen ,
What's in 't is precious ; if you are sick at sea ,
Or stomach-qualm'd at land , a dram of this 
Will drive away distemper . To some shade ,
And fit you to your manhood . May the gods 
Direct you to the best !

Amen . I thank thee 


Thus far ; and so farewell .

Thanks , royal sir .
My emperor hath wrote , I must from hence ;
And am right sorry that I must report ye 
My master's enemy .

Our subjects , sir ,
Will not endure his yoke ; and for ourself 
To show less sovereignty than they , must needs 
Appear unking-like .

So , sir : I desire of you 
A conduct over land to Milford-Haven .
Madam , all joy befall your Grace .

And you !

My lords , you are appointed for that office ;
The due of honour in no point omit .
So , farewell , noble Lucius .

Your hand , my lord .

Receive it friendly ; but from this time forth 
I wear it as your enemy .

Sir , the event 
Is yet to name the winner . Fare you well .

Leave not the worthy Lucius , good my lords ,
Till he have cross'd the Severn . Happiness !


He goes hence frowning ; but it honours us 
That we have given him cause .

'Tis all the better ;
Your valiant Britons have their wishes in it .

Lucius hath wrote already to the emperor 
How it goes here . It fits us therefore ripely 
Our chariots and horsemen be in readiness ;
The powers that he already hath in Gallia 
Will soon be drawn to head , from whence he moves 
His war for Britain .

'Tis not sleepy business ;
But must be look'd to speedily and strongly .

Our expectation that it would be thus 
Hath made us forward . But , my gentle queen ,
Where is our daughter ? She hath not appear'd 
Before the Roman , nor to us hath tender'd 
The duty of the day ; she looks us like 
A thing more made of malice than of duty :
We have noted it . Call her before us , for 
We have been too slight in sufferance .


Royal sir .
Since the exile of Posthumus , most retir'd 
Hath her life been ; the cure whereof , my lord ,
'Tis time must do . Beseech your majesty ,
Forbear sharp speeches to her ; she's a lady 
So tender of rebukes that words are strokes ,
And strokes death to her .


Where is she , sir ? How 
Can her contempt be answer'd ?

Please you , sir ,
Her chambers are all lock'd , and there's no answer 
That will be given to the loudest noise we make .

My lord , when last I went to visit her ,
She pray'd me to excuse her keeping close ,
Whereto constrain'd by her infirmity ,
She should that duty leave unpaid to you ,
Which daily she was bound to proffer ; this 
She wish'd me to make known , but our great court 
Made me to blame in memory .

Her doors lock'd !
Not seen of late ! Grant , heavens , that which I fear 
Prove false !


Son , I say , follow the king .

That man of hers , Pisanio , her old servant ,
I have not seen these two days .

Go , look after .

Pisanio , thou that stand'st so for Posthumus !
He hath a drug of mine ; I pray his absence 
Proceed by swallowing that , for he believes 
It is a thing most precious . But for her ,
Where is she gone ? Haply , despair hath sciz'd her ,
Or , wing'd with fervour of her love , she's flown 
To her desir'd Posthumus . Gone she is 
To death or to dishonour , and my end 
Can make good use of either ; she being down ,
I have the placing of the British crown .

How now , my son !

'Tis certain she is fled .
Go in and cheer the king ; he rages , none 
Dare come about him .

All the better ; may 
This night forestall him of the coming day !


I love and hate her ; for she's fair and royal ,
And that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite 
Than lady , ladies , woman ; from every one 
The best she hath , and she , of all compounded ,
Outsells them all . I love her therefore ; but 
Disdaining me and throwing favours on 
The low Posthumus slanders so her judgment 
That what's else rare is chok'd , and in that point 
I will conclude to hate her , nay , indeed ,
To be reveng'd upon her . For , when fools 
Shall 


Who is here ? What ! are you packing , sirrah ?
Come hither . Ah ! you precious pandar . Villain ,
Where is thy lady ? In a word ; or else 

Thou art straightway with the fiends .

O ! good my lord .

Where is thy lady ? or , by Jupiter 
I will not ask again . Close villain ,
I'll have this secret from thy heart , or rip 
Thy heart to find it . Is she with Posthumus ?
From whose so many weights of baseness cannot 
A dram of worth be drawn .

Alas ! my lord ,
How can she be with him ? When was she miss'd ?
He is in Rome .

Where is she , sir ? Come nearer ,
No further halting ; satisfy me home 
What is become of her ?

O ! my all-worthy lord .

All-worthy villain !
Discover where thy mistress is at once .
At the next word ; no more of 'worthy lord !' 
Speak , or thy silence on the instant is 
Thy condemnation and thy death .

Then , sir ,
This paper is the history of my knowledge 
Touching her flight .


Let's see 't . I will pursue her 
Even to Augustus' throne .

Or this , or perish .
She's far enough ; and what he learns by this 
May prove his travel , not her danger .

Hum !

I'll write to my lord she's dead . O Imogen !
Safe mayst thou wander , safe return agen !

Sirrah , is this letter true ?

Sir , as I think .

It is Posthumus' hand ; I know 't . Sirrah , if thou wouldst not be a villain , but do me true service , undergo those employments wherein I should have cause to use thee with a serious industry , that is , what villany soe'er I bid thee do , to perform it directly and truly , I would think thee an honest man ; thou shouldst neither want my means for thy relief nor my voice for thy preferment .

Well , my good lord .

Wilt thou serve me ? For since patiently and constantly thou hast stuck to the bare fortune of that beggar Posthumus , thou canst not , in the course of gratitude , but be a diligent follower of mine . Wilt thou serve me ?

Sir , I will .

Give me thy hand ; here's my purse . Hast any of thy late master's garments in thy possession ?

I have , my lord , at my lodging , the same suit he wore when he took leave of my lady and mistress .

The first service thou dost me , fetch that suit hither : let it be thy first service ; go .

I shall , my lord .


Meet thee at Milford-Haven !I forgot to ask him one thing ; I'll remember 't anon ,even there , thou villain Posthumus , will I kill thee . I would these garments were come . She said upon a time ,the bitterness of it I now belch from my heart ,that she held the very garment of Posthumus in more respect than my noble and natural person , together with the adornment of my qualities . With that suit upon my back will I ravish her : first kill him , and in her eyes ; there shall she see my valour , which will then be a torment to her contempt . He on the ground , my speech of insultment ended on his dead body , and when my lust hath dined ,which , as I say , to vex her , I will execute in the clothes that she so praised ,to the court I'll knock her back , foot her home again . She hath despised me rejoicingly , and I'll be merry in my revenge .

Be those the garments ?

Ay , my noble lord .

How long is 't since she went to Milford-Haven ?

She can scarce be there yet .

Bring this apparel to my chamber ; that is the second thing that I have commanded thee : the third is , that thou wilt be a voluntary mute to my design . Be but duteous , and true preferment shall tender itself to thee . My revenge is now at Milford ; would I had wings to follow it !
Come , and be true .


Thou bidd'st me to my loss ; for true to thee 
Were to prove false , which I will never be ,
To him that is most true . To Milford go ,
And find not her whom thou pursu'st . Flow , flow ,
You heavenly blessings , on her ! This fool's speed 
Be cross'd with slowness ; labour be his meed !


I see a man's life is a tedious one ;
I have tir'd myself , and for two nights together 
Have made the ground my bed ; I should be sick 
But that my resolution helps me . Milford ,
When from the mountain-top Pisanio show'd thee ,
Thou wast within a ken . O Jove ! I think 
Foundations fly the wretched ; such , I mean ,
Where they should be reliev'd . Two beggars told me 
I could not miss my way ; will poor folks lie ,
That have afflictions on them , knowing 'tis 
A punishment or trial ? Yes ; no wonder ,
When rich ones scarce tell true . To lapse in fulness 
Is sorer than to lie for need , and falsehood 
Is worse in kings than beggars . My dear lord !
Thou art one o' the false ones . Now I think on thee ,
My hunger's gone , but even before I was 
At point to sink for food . But what is this ?
Here is a path to 't ; 'tis some savage hold ;
I were best not call , I dare not call , yet famine ,
Ere clean it o'erthrow nature , makes it valiant .
Plenty and peace breeds cowards , hardness ever 
Of hardiness is mother . Ho ! Who's here ?
If any thing that's civil , speak ; if savage ,
Take or lend . Ho ! No answer ? Then I'll enter .
Best draw my sword ; and if mine enemy 
But fear the sword like me , he'll scarcely look on 't .
Such a foe , good heavens !

You , Polydore , have prov'd best woodman , and 
Are master of the feast ; Cadwal and I 
Will play the cook and servant , 'tis our match ;
The sweat of industry would dry and die 
But for the end it works to . Come ; our stomachs 
Will make what's homely savoury ; weariness 
Can snore upon the flint when resty sloth 
Finds the down pillow hard . Now , peace be here ,
Poor house , that keep'st thyself !

I am throughly weary .

I am weak with toil , yet strong in appetite .

There is cold meat i' the cave ; we'll browse on that ,
Whilst what we have kill'd be cook'd .

Stay ; come not in ;
But that it eats our victuals , I should think 
Here were a fairy .

What's the matter , sir ?

By Jupiter , an angel ! or , if not ,
An earthly paragon ! Behold divineness 
No elder than a boy !


Good masters , harm me not :
Before I enter'd here , I call'd ; and thought 
To have begg'd or bought what I have took . Good troth ,
I have stol'n nought , nor would not , though I had found 
Gold strew'd i' the floor . Here's money for my meat ;
I would have left it on the board so soon 
As I had made my meal , and parted 
With prayers for the provider .

Money , youth ?

All gold and silver rather turn to dirt !
As 'tis no better reckon'd but of those 
Who worship dirty gods .

I see you're angry .
Know , if you kill me for my fault , I should 
Have died had I not made it .

Whither bound ?

To Milford-Haven .

What's your name ?

Fidele , sir . I have a kinsman who 
Is bound for Italy ; he embark'd at Milford :
To whom being going , almost spent with hunger ,
I am fall'n in this offence .

Prithee , fair youth ,
Think us no churis , nor measure our good minds 
By this rude place we live in . Well encounter'd !
'Tis almost night ; you shall have better cheer 
Ere you depart , and thanks to stay and eat it .
Boys , bid him welcome .

Were you a woman , youth ,
I should woo hard but be your groom . In honesty ,
I bid for you , as I do buy .

I'll make 't my comfort 
He is a man ; I'll love him as my brother ;
And such a welcome as I'd give to him 
After a long absence , such is yours : most welcome !
Be sprightly , for you fall 'mongst friends .

'Mongst friends ,
If brothers .

Would it had been so , that they 
Had been my father's sons ; then had my prize 
Been less , and so more equal ballasting 
To thee , Posthumus .

He wrings at some distress .

Would I could free 't !

Or I , whate'er it be ,
What pain it cost , what danger . Gods !

Hark , boys 


Great men ,
That had a court no bigger than this cave ,
That did attend themselves and had the virtue 
Which their own conscience seal'd them ,laying by 
That nothing-gift of differing multitudes ,
Could not out-peer these twain . Pardon me , gods !
I'd change my sex to be companion with them ,
Since Leonatus' false .

It shall be so .
Boys , we'll go dress our hunt . Fair youth , come in :
Discourse is heavy , fasting ; when we have supp'd ,
We'll mannerly demand thee of thy story ,
So far as thou wilt speak it .

Pray , draw near .

The night to the owl and morn to the lark less welcome .

Thanks , sir .

I pray , draw near .


This is the tenour of the emperor's writ :
That since the common men are now in action 
'Gainst the Pannonians and Dalmatians ,
And that the legions now in Gallia are 
Full weak to undertake our wars against 
The fall'n-off Britons , that we do incite 
The gentry to this business . He creates 
Lucius pro-consul ; and to you the tribunes ,
For this immediate levy , he commends 
His absolute commission . Long live C sar !

Is Lucius general of the forces ?

Ay .

Remaining now in Gallia ?

With those legions 
Which I have spoke of , whereunto your levy 
Must be supplyant ; the words of your commission 
Will tie you to the numbers and the time 
Of their dispatch .

We will discharge our duty .

I am near to the place where they should meet , if Pisanio have mapped it truly . How fit his garments serve me ! Why should his mistress , who was made by him that made the tailor , not be fit too ? the rather ,saving reverence of the word ,for 'tis said a woman's fitness comes by fits . Therein I must play the workman . I dare speak it to myself ,for it is not vain-glory , for a man and his glass to confer in his own chamber ,I mean , the lines of my body are as well drawn as his ; no less young , more strong , not beneath him in fortunes , beyond him in the advantage of the time , above him in birth , alike conversant in general services , and more remarkable in single oppositions ; yet this imperceiverant thing loves him in my despite . What mortality is ! Posthumus , thy head , which now is growing upon thy shoulders , shall within this hour be off , thy mistress enforced , thy garments cut to pieces before thy face ; and all this done , spurn her home to her father , who may haply be a little angry for my so rough usage , but my mother , having power of his testiness , shall turn all into my commendations . My horse is tied up safe ; out , sword , and to a sore purpose ! Fortune , put them into my hand ! This is the very description of their meeting-place ; and the fellow dares not deceive me .


You are not well ; remain here in the cave ;
We'll come to you after hunting .

Brother , stay here ;
Are we not brothers ?

So man and man should be ,
But clay and clay differs in dignity ,
Whose dust is both alike . I am very sick .

Go you to hunting ; I'll abide with him .

So sick I am not , yet I am not well ;
But not so citizen a wanton as 
To seem to die ere sick . So please you , leave me ;
Stick to your journal course ; the breach of custom 
Is breach of all . I am ill ; but your being by me 
Cannot amend me ; society is no comfort 
To one not sociable . I am not very sick ,
Since I can reason of it ; pray you , trust me here ,
I'll rob none but myself , and let me die ,
Stealing so poorly .

I love thee ; I have spoke it ;
How much the quantity , the weight as much ,
As I do love my father .

What ! how ! how !

If it be sin to say so , sir , I yoke me 
In my good brother's fault : I know not why 
I love this youth ; and I have heard you say ,
Love's reason's without reason : the bier at door ,
And a demand who is 't shall die , I'd say 
'My father , not this youth .' 

O noble strain !
O worthiness of nature ! breed of greatness !
Cowards father cowards , and base things sire base :
Nature hath meal and bran , contempt and grace .
I'm not their father ; yet who this should be ,
Doth miracle itself , lov'd before me .
'Tis the ninth hour o' the morn .

Brother , farewell .

I wish ye sport .

You health . So please you , sir .

These are kind creatures . Gods , what lies I have heard !
Our courtiers say all's savage but at court :
Experience , O ! thou disprov'st report .
The imperious seas breed monsters , for the dish 
Poor tributary rivers as sweet fish .
I am sick still , heart-sick . Pisanio ,
I'll now taste of thy drug .


I could not stir him ;
He said he was gentle , but unfortunate ;
Dishonestly afflicted , but yet honest .

Thus did he answer me ; yet said hereafter 
I might know more .

To the field , to the field !


We'll leave you for this time ; go in and rest .

We'll not be long away .

Pray , be not sick ,
For you must be our housewife .

Well or ill ,
I am bound to you .

And shalt be ever .

This youth , howe'er distress'd , appears he hath had 
Good ancestors .

How angel-like he sings !

But his neat cookery ! he cut our roots 
In characters ,
And sauc'd our broths as Juno had been sick 
And he her dieter .

Nobly he yokes 
A smiling with a sigh , as if the sigh 
Was that it was , for not being such a smile ;
The smile mocking the sigh , that it would fly 
From so divine a temple , to commix 
With winds that sailors rail at .

I do note 
That grief and patience rooted in him , both 
Mingle their spurs together .

Grow , patience !
And let the stinking-elder , grief , untwine 
His perishing root with the increasing vine !

It is great morning . Come , away !Who's there ?


I cannot find those runagates ; that villain 
Hath mock'd me . I am faint .

'Those runagates !' 
Means he not us ? I partly know him ; 'tis 
Cloten , the son o' the queen . I fear some ambush .
I saw him not these many years , and yet 
I know 'tis he . We are held as outlaws : hence !

He is but one . You and my brother search 
What companies are near ; pray you , away ;
Let me alone with him .


Soft ! What are you 
That fly me thus ? some villain mountainers ?
I have heard of such . What slave art thou ?

A thing 
More slavish did I ne'er than answering 
A 'slave' without a knock .

Thou art a robber ,
A law-breaker , a villain . Yield thee , thief .

To who ? to thee ? What art thou ? Have not I 
An arm as big as thine ? a heart as big ?
Thy words , I grant , are bigger , for I wear not 
My dagger in my mouth . Say what thou art ,
Why I should yield to thee ?

Thou villain base ,
Know'st me not by my clothes ?

No , nor thy tailor , rascal ,
Who is thy grandfather : he made those clothes ,
Which , as it seems , make thee .

Thou precious varlet ,
My tailor made them not .

Hence then , and thank 
The man that gave them thee . Thou art some fool ;
I am loath to beat thee .

Thou injurious thief ,
Hear but my name , and tremble .

What's thy name ?

Cloten , thou villain .

Cloten , thou double villain , be thy name ,
I cannot tremble at it ; were it Toad , or Adder , Spider ,
'Twould move me sooner .

To thy further fear ,
Nay , to thy mere confusion , thou shalt know 
I am son to the queen .

I'm sorry for 't , not seeming 
So worthy as thy birth .

Art not afeard ?

Those that I reverence those I fear , the wise ;
At fools I laugh , not fear them .

Die the death :
When I have slain thee with my proper hand ,
I'll follow those that even now fled hence ,
And on the gates of Lud's town set your heads :
Yield , rustic mountaineer .

No companies abroad .

None in the world . You did mistake him , sure .

I cannot tell ; long is it since I saw him ,
But time hath nothing blurr'd those lines of favour 
Which then he wore ; the snatches in his voice ,
And burst of speaking , were as his . I am absolute 
'Twas very Cloten .

In this place we left them :
I wish my brother make good time with him ,
You say he is so fell .

Being scarce made up ,
I mean , to man , he had not apprehension 
Of roaring terrors ; for defect of judgment 
Is oft the cease of fear . But see , thy brother .


This Cloten was a fool , an empty purse ,
There was no money in 't . Not Hercules 
Could have knock'd out his brains , for he had none ;
Yet I not doing this , the fool had borne 
My head as I do his .

What hast thou done ?

I am perfect what : cut off one Cloten's head ,
Son to the queen , after his own report ;
Who call'd me traitor , mountaineer , and swore ,
With his own single hand he'd take us in ,
Displace our heads where thank the gods !they grow ,
And set them on Lud's town .

We are all undone .

Why , worthy father , what have we to lose ,
But that he swore to take , our lives ? The law 
Protects not us ; then why should we be tender 
To let an arrogant piece of flesh threat us ,
Play judge and executioner all himself ,
For we do fear the law ? What company 
Discover you abroad ?

No single soul 
Can we set eye on ; but in all safe reason 
He must have some attendants . Though his humour 
Was nothing but mutation , ay , and that 
From one bad thing to worse ; not frenzy , not 
Absolute madness could so far have rav'd 
To bring him here alone . Although , perhaps ,
It may be heard at court that such as we 
Cave here , hunt here , are outlaws , and in time 
May make some stronger head ; the which he hearing ,
As it is like him ,might break out , and swear 
He'd fetch us in ; yet is 't not probable 
To come alone , either he so undertaking ,
Or they so suffering ; then , on good ground we fear ,
If we do fear this body hath a tail 
More perilous than the head .

Let ordinance 
Come as the gods foresay it ; howsoe'er ,
My brother hath done well .

I had no mind 
To hunt this day ; the boy Fidele's sickness 
Did make my way long forth .

With his own sword ,
Which he did wave against my throat , I have ta'en 
His head from him ; I'll throw 't into the creek 
Behind our rock , and let it to the sea ,
And tell the fishes he's the queen's son , Cloten :
That's all I reck .


I fear 'twill be reveng'd .
Would , Polydore , thou hadst not done 't ! though valour 
Becomes thee well enough .

Would I had done 't 
So the revenge alone pursu'd me ! Polydore ,
I love thee brotherly , but envy much 
Thou hast robb'd me of this deed ; I would revenges ,
That possible strength might meet , would seek us through 
And put us to our answer .

Well , 'tis done .
We'll hunt no more to-day , nor seek for danger 
Where there's no profit . I prithee , to our rock ;
You and Fidele play the cooks ; I'll stay 
Till hasty Polydore return , and bring him 
To dinner presently .

Poor sick Fidele !
I'll willingly to him ; to gain his colour 
I'd let a parish of such Clotens blood ,
And praise myself for charity .


O thou goddess !
Thou divine Nature , how thyself thou blazon'st 
In these two princely boys . They are as gentle 
As zephyrs , blowing below the violet ,
Not wagging his sweet head ; and yet as rough ,
Their royal blood enchaf'd , as the rud'st wind ,
That by the top doth take the mountain pine ,
And make him stoop to the vale . 'Tis wonder 
That an invisible instinct should frame them 
To royalty unlearn'd , honour untaught ,
Civility not seen from other , valour 
That wildly grows in them , but yields a crop 
As if it had been sow'd ! Yet still it's strange 
What Cloten's being here to us portends ,
Or what his death will bring us .


Where's my brother ?
I have sent Cloten's clotpoll down the stream ,
In embassy to his mother ; his body's hostage 
For his return .


My ingenious instrument !
Hark ! Polydore , it sounds ; but what occasion 
Hath Cadwal now to give it motion ? Hark !

Is he at home ?

He went hence even now .

What does he mean ? since death of my dear'st mother 
It did not speak before . All solemn things 
Should answer solemn accidents . The matter ?
Triumphs for nothing and lamenting toys 
Is jollity for apes and grief for boys .
Is Cadwal mad ?


Look ! here he comes ,
And brings the dire occasion in his arms 
Of what we blame him for .

The bird is dead 
That we have made so much on . I had rather 
Have skipp'd from sixteen years of age to sixty ,
To have turn'd my leaping-time into a crutch ,
Than have seen this .

O , sweetest , fairest lily !
My brother wears thee not the one half so well 
As when thou grew'st thyself .

O melancholy !
Who ever yet could sound thy bottom ? find 
The ooze , to show what coast thy sluggish crare 
Might easiliest harbour in ? Thou blessed thing !
Jove knows what man thou mightst have made ; but I ,
Thou diedst , a most rare boy , of melancholy .
How found you him ?

Stark , as you see :
Thus smiling , as some fly had tickled slumber ,
Not as death's dart , being laugh'd at ; his right cheek 
Reposing on a cushion .

Where ?

O' the floor ,
His arms thus leagu'd ; I thought he slept , and put 
My clouted brogues from off my feet , whose rudeness 
Answer'd my steps too loud .

Why , he but sleeps :
If he be gone , he'll make his grave a bed ;
With female fairies will his tomb be haunted ,
And worms will not come to thee .

With fairest flowers 
While summer lasts and I live here , Fidele ,
I'll sweeten thy sad grave ; thou shalt not lack 
The flower that's like thy face , pale primrose , nor 
The azur'd hare-bell , like thy veins , no , nor 
The leaf of eglantine , whom not to slander ,
Out-sweeten'd not thy breath : the ruddock would ,
With charitable bill ,O bill ! sore-shaming 
Those rich-left heirs , that let their fathers lie 
Without a monument ,bring thee all this ;
Yea , and furr'd moss besides , when flowers are none ,
To winter-ground thy corse .

Prithee , have done ,
And do not play in wench-like words with that 
Which is so serious . Let us bury him ,
And not protract with admiration what 
Is now due debt . To the grave !

Say , where shall 's lay him ?

By good Euriphile , our mother .

Be 't so :
And let us , Polydore , though now our voices 
Have got the mannish crack , sing him to the ground ,
As once our mother ; use like note and words ,
Save that Euriphile must be Fidele .

Cadwal ,
I cannot sing ; I'll weep , and word it with thee ;
For notes of sorrow out of tune are worse 
Than priests and fanes that lie .

We'll speak it then .

Great griefs , I see , medicine the less , for Cloten 
Is quite forgot . He was a queen's son , boys ,
And though he came our enemy , remember 
He was paid for that ; though mean and mighty rotting 
Together , have one dust , yet reverence 
That angel of the world doth make distinction 
Of place 'tween high and low . Our foe was princely ,
And though you took his life , as being our foe ,
Yet bury him as a prince .

Pray you , fetch him hither .
Thersites' body is as good as Ajax' 
When neither are alive .

If you'll go fetch him ,
We'll say our song the whilst . Brother , begin .


Nay , Cadwal , we must lay his head to the east ;
My father hath a reason for 't .

'Tis true .

Come on then , and remove him .

So , begin .


Fear no more the heat o' the sun ,
Nor the furious winter's rages ;
Thou thy worldly task hast done ,
Home art gone , and ta'en thy wages ;
Golden lads and girls all must ,
As chimney-sweepers , come to dust .

Fear no more the frown o' the great ,
Thou art past the tyrant's stroke :
Care no more to clothe and eat ;
To thee the reed is as the oak :
The sceptre , learning , physic , must 
All follow this , and come to dust .

Fear no more the lightning-flash ,

Nor the all-dreaded thunder-stone ;

Fear not slander , censure rash ;

Thou hast finish'd joy and moan 

All lovers young , all lovers must 
Consign to thee , and come to dust .

No exorciser harm thee !

Nor no witchcraft charm thee !

Ghost unlaid forbear thee !

Nothing ill come near thee !

Quiet consummation have ;
And renowned be thy grave !

We have done our obsequies . Come , lay him down .

Here's a few flowers , but 'bout mid-night , more ;
The herbs that have on them cold dew o' the night 
Are strewings fitt'st for graves . Upon their faces 
You were as flowers , now wither'd ; even so 
These herblets shall , which we upon you strew .
Come on , away ; apart upon our knees .
The ground that gave them first has them again ;
Their pleasures here are past , so is their pain .


Yes , sir , to Milford-Haven ; which is the way ?
I thank you . By yond bush ? Pray , how far thither ?
'Ods pittikins ! can it be six mile yet ?
I have gone all night : Faith , I'll lie down and sleep .


But , soft ! no bed-fellow ! O gods and goddesses !
These flowers are like the pleasures of the world ;
This bloody man , the care on 't . I hope I dream ;
For so I thought I was a cave-keeper ,
And cook to honest creatures ; but 'tis not so ,
'Twas but a bolt of nothing , shot at nothing ,
Which the brain makes of fumes . Our very eyes 
Are sometimes like our judgments , blind . Good faith ,
I tremble still with fear ; but if there be 
Yet left in heaven as small a drop of pity 
As a wren's eye , fear'd gods , a part of it !
The dream's here still ; even when I wake , it is 
Without me , as within me ; not imagin'd , felt .
A headless man ! The garments of Posthumus !
I know the shape of 's leg , this is his hand ,
His foot Mercurial , his Martial thigh ,
The brawns of Hercules , but his Jovial face 
Murder in heaven ? How ! 'Tis gone . Pisanio ,
All curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks ,
And mine to boot , be darted on thee ! Thou ,
Conspir'd with that irregulous devil , Cloten ,
Hast here cut off my lord . To write and read 
Be henceforth treacherous ! Damn'd Pisanio 
Hath with his forged letters , damn'd Pisanio ,
From this most bravest vessel of the world 
Struck the main-top ! O Posthumus ! alas !
Where is thy head ? where's that ? Ay me ! where's that ?
Pisanio might have kill'd thee at the heart ,
And left this head on . How should this be ? Pisanio ?
'Tis he and Cloten ; malice and lucre in them 
Have laid this woe here . O ! 'tis pregnant , pregnant !
The drug he gave me , which he said was precious 
And cordial to me , have I not found it 
Murderous to the senses ? That confirms it home ;
This is Pisanio's deed , and Cloten's : O !
Give colour to my pale cheek with thy blood ,
That we the horrider may seem to those 
Which chance to find us . O ! my lord , my lord .

To them the legions garrison'd in Gallia ,
After your will , have cross'd the sea , attending 
You here at Milford-Haven with your ships :
They are in readiness .

But what from Rome ?

The senate hath stirr'd up the confiners 
And gentlemen of Italy , most willing spirits ,
That promise noble service ; and they come 
Under the conduct of bold Iachimo ,
Sienna's brother .

When expect you them ?

With the next benefit o' the wind .

This forwardness 
Makes our hopes fair . Command our present numbers 
Be muster'd ; bid the captains look to 't . Now , sir ,
What have you dream'd of late of this war's purpose ?

Last night the very gods show'd me a vision ,
I fast and pray'd for their intelligence ,thus :
I saw Jove's bird , the Roman eagle , wing'd 
From the spongy south to this part of the west ,
There vanish'd in the sunbeams ; which portends ,
Unless my sins abuse my divination ,
Success to the Roman host .

Dream often so ,
And never false . Soft , ho ! what trunk is here 
Without his top ? The ruin speaks that sometime 
It was a worthy building . How ! a page !
Or dead or sleeping on him ? But dead rather ,
For nature doth abhor to make his bed 
With the defunct , or sleep upon the dead .
Let's see the boy's face .

He's alive , my lord .

He'll , then , instruct us of this body . Young one ,
Inform us of thy fortunes , for it seems 
They crave to be demanded . Who is this 
Thou mak'st thy bloody pillow ? Or who was he 
That , otherwise than noble nature did ,
Hath alter'd that good picture ? What's thy interest 
In this sad wrack ? How came it ? Who is it ?
What art thou ?

I am nothing ; or if not ,
Nothing to be were better . This was my master ,
A very valiant Briton and a good ,
That here by mountaineers lies slain . Alas !
There are no more such masters ; I may wander 
From east to occident , cry out for service ,
Try many , all good , serve truly , never 
Find such another master .

'Lack , good youth !
Thou mov'st no less with thy complaining than 
Thy master in bleeding . Say his name , good friend .

Richard du Champ .

If I do lie and do 
No harm by it , though the gods hear , I hope 
They'll pardon it .Say you , sir ?

Thy name ?

Fidele , sir .

Thou dost approve thyself the very same ;
Thy name well fits thy faith , thy faith thy name .
Wilt take thy chance with me ? I will not say 
Thou shalt be so well master'd , but be sure 
No less belov'd . The Roman emperor's letters ,
Sent by a consul to me , should not sooner 
Than thine own worth prefer thee . Go with me .

I'll follow , sir . But first , an 't please the gods ,
I'll hide my master from the flies , as deep 
As these poor pickaxes can dig ; and when 
With wild wood-leaves and weeds I ha' strew'd his grave ,
And on it said a century of prayers ,
Such as I can , twice o'er , I'll weep and sigh ;
And , leaving so his service , follow you ,
So please you entertain me .

Ay , good youth ,
And rather father thee than master thee .
My friends ,
The boy hath taught us manly duties ; let us 
Find out the prettiest daisied plot we can ,
And make him with our pikes and partisans 
A grave ; come , arm him . Boy , he is preferr'd 
By thee to us , and he shall be interr'd 
As soldiers can . Be cheerful ; wipe thine eyes :
Some falls are means the happier to arise .


Again ; and bring me word how 'tis with her .

A fever with the absence of her son ,
A madness , of which her life's in danger . Heavens !
How deeply you at once do touch me . Imogen ,
The great part of my comfort , gone ; my queen 
Upon a desperate bed , and in a time 
When fearful wars point at me ; her son gone ,
So needful for this present : it strikes me , past 
The hope of comfort . But for thee , fellow ,
Who needs must know of her departure and 
Dost seem so ignorant , we'll enforce it from thee 
By a sharp torture .

Sir , my life is yours ,
I humbly set it at your will ; but , for my mistress ,
I nothing know where she remains , why gone ,
Nor when she purposes return . Beseech your highness ,
Hold me your loyal servant .

Good my liege ,
The day that she was missing he was here ;
I dare be bound he's true and shall perform 
All parts of his subjection loyally . For Cloten ,
There wants no diligence in seeking him ,
And will , no doubt , be found .

The time is troublesome .


We'll slip you for a season ; but our jealousy 
Does yet depend .

So please-your majesty ,
The Roman legions , all from Gallia drawn ,
Are landed on your coast , with a supply 
Of Roman gentlemen , by the senate sent .

Now for the counsel of my son and queen !
I am amaz'd with matter .

Good my liege ,
Your preparation can affront no less 
Than what you hear of ; come more , for more you're ready :
The want is , but to put those powers in motion 
That long to move .

I thank you . Let's withdraw ;
And meet the time as it seeks us . We fear not 
What can from Italy annoy us , but 
We grieve at chances here . Away !


I heard no letter from my master since 
I wrote him Imogen was slain ; 'tis strange ;
Nor hear I from my mistress , who did promise 
To yield me often tidings ; neither know I 
What is betid to Cloten ; but remain 
Perplex'd in all : the heavens still must work .
Wherein I am false I am honest ; not true to be true :
These present wars shall find I love my country ,
Even to the note o' the king , or I'll fall in them .
All other doubts , by time let them be clear'd ;
Fortune brings in some boats that are not steer'd .


The noise is round about us .

Let us from it .

What pleasure , sir , find we in life , to lock it 
From action and adventure ?

Nay , what hope 
Have we in hiding us ? this way , the Romans 
Must or for Britons slay us , or receive us 
For barbarous and unnatural revolts 
During their use , and slay us after .

Sons ,
We'll higher to the mountains ; there secure us .
To the king's party there's no going ; newness 
Of Cloten's death ,we being not known , not muster'd 
Among the bands ,may drive us to a render 
Where we have liv'd , and so extort from 's that 
Which we have done , whose answer would be death 
Drawn on with torture .

This is , sir , a doubt 
In such a time nothing becoming you ,
Nor satisfying us .

It is not likely 
That when they hear the Roman horses neigh ,
Behold their quarter'd fires , have both their eyes 
And ears so cloy'd importantly as now ,
That they will waste their time upon our note ,
To know from whence we are .

O ! I am known 
Of many in the army ; many years ,
Though Cloten then but young , you see , not wore him 
From my remembrance . And , besides , the king 
Hath not deserv'd my service nor your loves 
Who find in my exile the want of breeding ,
The certainty of this hard life ; aye hopeless 
To have the courtesy your cradle promis'd ,
But to be still hot summer's tanlings and 
The shrinking slaves of winter .

Than be so 
Better to cease to be . Pray , sir , to the army :
I and my brother are not known ; yourself ,
So out of thought , and thereto so o'ergrown ,
Cannot be question'd .

By this sun that shines ,
I'll thither : what thing is it that I never 
Did see man die ! scarce ever look'd on blood 
But that of coward hares , hot goats , and venison !
Never bestrid a horse , save one that had 
A rider like myself , who ne'er wore rowel 
Nor iron on his heel ! I am asham'd 
To look upon the holy sun , to have 
The benefit of his bless'd beams , remaining 
So long a poor unknown .

By heavens ! I'll go :
If you will bless me , sir , and give me leave ,
I'll take the better care ; but if you will not ,
The hazard therefore due fall on me by 
The hands of Romans .

So say I ; amen .

No reason I , since of your lives you set 
So slight a valuation , should reserve 
My crack'd one to more care . Have with you , boys !
If in your country wars you chance to die ,
That is my bed too , lads , and there I'll lie :
Lead , lead .

The time seems long ; their blood thinks scorn ,
Till it fly out and show them princes born .

Yea , bloody cloth , I'll keep thee , for I wish'd 
Thou shouldst be colour'd thus . You married ones ,
If each of you should take this course , how many 
Must murder wives much better than themselves 
For wrying but a little ! O Pisanio !
Every good servant does not all commands ;
No bond but to do just ones . Gods ! if you 
Should have ta'en vengeance on my faults , I never 
Had liv'd to put on this ; so had you sav'd 
The noble Imogen to repent , and struck 
Me , wretch more worth your vengeance . But , alack !
You snatch some hence for little faults ; that's love ,
To have them fall no more ; you some permit 
To second ills with ills , each elder worse ,
And make them dread it , to the doers' thrift .
But Imogen is your own ; do your best wills ,
And make me bless'd to obey . I am brought hither 
Among the Italian gentry , and to fight 
Against my lady's kingdom ; 'tis enough 
That , Britain , I have kill'd thy mistress-piece !
I'll give no wound to thee . Therefore good heavens ,
Hear patiently my purpose : I'll disrobe me 
Of these Italian weeds , and suit myself 
As does a Briton peasant ; so I'll fight 
Against the part I come with , so I'll die 
For thee , O Imogen ! even for whom my life 
Is , every breath , a death : and thus , unknown ,
Pitied nor hated , to the face of peril 
Myself I'll dedicate . Let me make men know 
More valour in me than my habits show .
Gods ! put the strength o' the Leonati in me .
To shame the guise o' the world , I will begin 
The fashion , less without and more within .


The heaviness and guilt within my bosom 
Takes off my manhood : I have belied a lady ,
The princess of this country , and the air on 't 
Revengingly enfeebles me ; or could this carl ,
A very drudge of nature's , have subdu'd me 
In my profession ? Knighthoods and honours , borne 
As I wear mine , are titles but of scorn .
If that thy gentry , Britain , go before 
This lout as he exceeds our lords , the odds 
Is that we scarce are men and you are gods .


Stand , stand ! We have the advantage of the ground .
The lane is guarded ; nothing routs us but 
The villany of our fears .

Stand , stand , and fight !

Stand , stand , and fight !

Away , boy , from the troops , and save thyself ;
For friends kill friends , and the disorder's such 
As war were hoodwink'd .

'Tis their fresh supplies .

It is a day turn'd strangely : or betimes 
Let's re-inforce , or fly .


Cam'st thou from where they made the stand ?

I did :
Though you , it seems , come from the fliers .

I did .

No blame be to you , sir ; for all was lost ,
But that the heavens fought . The king himself 
Of his wings destitute , the army broken ,
And but the backs of Britons seen , all flying 
Through a strait lane ; the enemy full-hearted ,
Lolling the tongue with slaughtering , having work 
More plentiful than tools to do 't , struck down 
Some mortally , some slightly touch'd , some falling 
Merely through fear ; that the strait pass was damm'd 
With dead men hurt behind , and cowards living 
To die with lengthen'd shame .

Where was this lane ?

Close by the battle , ditch'd , and wall'd with turf ;
Which gave advantage to an ancient soldier ,
An honest one , I warrant ; who deserv'd 
So long a breeding as his white beard came to ,
In doing this for his country ; athwart the lane ,
He , with two striplings ,lads more like to run 
The country base than to commit such slaughter ,
With faces fit for masks , or rather fairer 
Than those for preservation cas'd , or shame ,
Made good the passage ; cried to those that fled ,
'Our Britain's harts die flying , not our men :
To darkness fleet souls that fly backwards . Stand !
Or we are Romans , and will give you that 
Like beasts which you shun beastly , and may save ,
But to look back in frown : stand , stand !' These three ,
Three thousand confident , in act as many ,
For three performers are the file when all 
The rest do nothing ,with this word , 'Stand , stand !' 
Accommodated by the place , more charming 
With their own nobleness ,which could have turn'd 
A distaff to a lance ,gilded pale looks ,
Part shame , part spirit renew'd ; that some , turn'd coward 
But by example ,O ! a sin of war ,
Damn'd in the first beginners ,'gan to look 
The way that they did , and to grin like lions 
Upon the pikes o' the hunters . Then began 
A stop i' the chaser , a retire , anon ,
A rout , confusion thick ; forthwith they fly 
Chickens , the way which they stoop'd eagles ; slaves ,
The strides they victors made . And now our cowards 
Like fragments in hard voyages became 
The life o' the need ; having found the back door open 
Of the unguarded hearts , Heavens ! how they wound ;
Some slain before ; some dying ; some their friends 
O'er-borne i' the former wave ; ten , chas'd by one ,
Are now each one the slaughter-man of twenty ;
Those that would die or ere resist are grown 
The mortal bugs o' the field .

This was strange chance :
A narrow lane , an old man , and two boys !

Nay , do not wonder at it ; you are made 
Rather to wonder at the things you hear 
Than to work any . Will you rime upon 't ,
And vent it for a mockery ? Here is one :
'Two boys , an old man twice a boy , a lane ,
Preserv'd the Britons , was the Romans' bane .' 

Nay , be not angry , sir .

'Lack ! to what end ?
Who dares not stand his foe , I'll be his friend ;
For if he'll do , as he is made to do ,
I know he'll quickly fly my friendship too .
You have put me into rime .

Farewell ; you're angry .


Still going ?This is a lord ! O noble misery !
To be i' the field , and ask , 'what news ?' of me !
To-day how many would have given their honours 
To have sav'd their carcases ! took heel to do 't ,
And yet died too ! I , in mine own woe charm'd ,
Could not find death where I did hear him groan ,
Nor feel him where he struck : being an ugly monster ,
'Tis strange he hides him in fresh cups , soft beds ,
Sweet words ; or hath more ministers than we 
That draw his knives i' the war . Well , I will find him ;
For being now a favourer to the Briton ,
No more a Briton , I have resum'd again 
The part I came in ; fight I will no more ,
But yield me to the veriest hind that shall 
Once touch my shoulder . Great the slaughter is 
Here made by the Roman ; great the answer be 
Britons must take . For me , my ransom's death ;
On either side I come to spend my breath ,
Which neither here I'll keep nor bear agen ,
But end it by some means for Imogen .


Great Jupiter be prais'd ! Lucius is taken .
'Tis thought the old man and his sons were angels .

There was a fourth man , in a silly habit ,
That gave th' affront with them .

So 'tis reported ;
But none of 'em can be found . Stand ! who is there ?

A Roman ,
Who had not now been drooping here , if seconds 
Had answer'd him .

Lay hands on him ; a dog !
A lag of Rome shall not return to tell 
What crows have peck'd them here . He brags his service 
As if he were of note : bring him to the king .


You shall not now be stol'n , you have locks upon you :
So graze as you find pasture .

Ay , or a stomach .


Most welcome , bondage ! for thou art a way ,
I think , to liberty . Yet am I better 
Than one that's sick o' the gout , since he had rather 
Groan so in perpetuity than be cur'd 
By the sure physician death ; who is the key 
To unbar these locks . My conscience , thou art fetter'd 
More than my shanks and wrists : you good gods , give me 
The penitent instrument to pick that bolt ;
Then , free for ever ! Is 't enough I am sorry ?
So children temporal fathers do appease ;
Gods are more full of mercy . Must I repent ?
I cannot do it better than in gyves ,
Desir'd more than constrain'd ; to satisfy ,
If of my freedom 'tis the main part , take 
No stricter render of me than my all .
I know you are more clement than vile men ,
Who of their broken debtors take a third ,
A sixth , a tenth , letting them thrive again 
On their abatement : that's not my desire ;
For Imogen's dear life take mine ; and though 
'Tis not so dear , yet 'tis a life ; you coin'd it ;
'Tween man and man they weigh not every stamp ;
Though light , take pieces for the figure's sake :
You rather mine , being yours ; and so great powers ,
If you will take this audit , take this life ,
And cancel these cold bonds . O Imogen !
I'll speak to thee in silence .


No more , thou thunder-master , show 
Thy spite on mortal flies :
With Mars fall out , with Juno chide ,
That thy adulteries 
Rates and revenges .
Hath my poor boy done aught but well ,
Whose face I never saw ?
I died whilst in the womb he stay'd 
Attending nature's law :
Whose father then as men report ,
Thou orphans' father art 
Thou shouldst have been , and shielded him 
From this earth-vexing smart .

Lucina lent not me her aid ,
But took me in my throes ;
That from me was Posthumus ript ,
Came crying 'mongst his foes ,
A thing of pity !

Great nature , like his ancestry ,
Moulded the stuff so fair ,
That he deserv'd the praise o' the world ,
As great Sicilius' heir .

When once he was mature for man ,
In Britain where was he 
That could stand up his parallel ,
Or fruitful object be 
In eye of Imogen , that best 
Could deem his dignity ?

With marriage wherefore was he mock'd ,
To be exil'd , and thrown 
From Leonati's seat , and cast 
From her his dearest one ,
Sweet Imogen ?

Why did you suffer Iachimo ,
Slight thing of Italy ,
To taint his nobler heart and brain 
With needless jealousy ;
And to become the geck and scorn 
O' the other's villany ?

For this from stiller seats we came ,
Our parents and us twain ,
That striking in our country's cause 
Fell bravely and were slain ;
Our fealty and Tenantius' right 
With honour to maintain .

Like hardiment Posthumus hath 
To Cymbeline perform'd :
Then Jupiter , thou king of gods ,
Why hast thou thus adjourn'd 
The graces for his merits due ,
Being all to dolours turn'd ?

Thy crystal window ope ; look out ;
No longer exercise 
Upon a valiant race thy harsh 
And potent injuries .

Since , Jupiter , our son is good ,
Take off his miseries .

Peep through thy marble mansion ; help !
Or we poor ghosts will cry 
To the shining synod of the rest 
Against thy deity .

Help , Jupiter ! or we appeal ,
And from thy justice fly .


No more , you petty spirits of region low , Offend our hearing ; hush ! How dare you ghosts 
Accuse the thunderer , whose bolt , you know ,
Sky-planted , batters all rebelling coasts ?
Poor shadows of Elysium , hence ; and rest 
Upon your never-withering banks of flowers :
Be not with mortal accidents opprest ;
No care of yours it is ; you know 'tis ours .
Whom best I love I cross ; to make my gift ,
The more delay'd , delighted . Be content ;
Your low-laid son our godhead will uplift :
His comforts thrive , his trials well are spent .
Our Jovial star reign'd at his birth , and in 
Our temple was he married . Rise , and fade !
He shall be lord of Lady Imogen ,
And happier much by his affliction made .
This tablet lay upon his breast , wherein 
Our pleasure his full fortune doth confine ;
And so , away : no further with your din 
Express impatience , lest you stir up mine .
Mount , eagle , to my palace crystalline .


He came in thunder ; his celestial breath 
Was sulphurous to smell ; the holy eagle 
Stoop'd , as to foot us ; his ascension is 
More sweet than our bless'd fields ; his royal bird 
Prunes the immortal wing and cloys his beak ,
As when his god is pleas'd .

Thanks , Jupiter !

The marble pavement closes ; he is enter'd 
His radiant roof . Away ! and , to be blest ,
Let us with care perform his great behest .


Sleep , thou hast been a grandsire , and begot 
A father to me ; and thou hast created 
A mother and two brothers . But O scorn !
Gone ! they went hence so soon as they were born :
And so I am awake . Poor wretches , that depend 
On greatness' favour dream as I have done ;
Wake , and find nothing . But , alas ! I swerve :
Many dream not to find , neither deserve ,
And yet are steep'd in favours ; so am I ,
That have this golden chance and know not why .
What fairies haunt this ground ? A book ? O rare one !
Be not , as is our fangled world , a garment 
Nobler than that it covers : let thy effects 
So follow , to be most unlike our courtiers ,
As good as promise .
Whenas a lion's whelp shall , to himself unknown , without seeking find , and be embraced by a piece of tender air ; and when from a stately cedar shall be lopped branches , which , being dead many years , shall after revive , be jointed to the old stock , and freshly grow , then shall Posthumus end his miseries , Britain be fortunate , and flourish in peace and plenty .
'Tis still a dream , or else such stuff as madmen 
Tongue and brain not ; either both or nothing ;
Or senseless speaking , or a speaking such 
As sense cannot untie . Be what it is ,
The action of my life is like it , which 
I'll keep , if but for sympathy .


Come , sir , are you ready for death ?

Over-roasted rather ; ready long ago .

Hanging is the word , sir : if you be ready for that , you are well cooked .

So , if I prove a good repast to the spectators , the dish pays the shot .

A heavy reckoning for you , sir ; but the comfort is , you shall be called to no more payments , fear no more tavern-bills , which are often the sadness of parting , as the procuring of mirth . You come in faint for want of meat , depart reeling with too much drink , sorry that you have paid too much ; and sorry that you are paid too much ; purse and brain both empty ; the brain the heavier for being too light , the purse too light , being drawn of heaviness of this contradiction you shall now be quit . O ! the charity of a penny cord ; it sums up thousands in a trice : you have no true debitor and creditor but it ; of what's past , is , and to come , the discharge . Your neck , sir , is pen , book and counters ; so the acquittance follows .

I am merrier to die than thou art to live .

Indeed , sir , he that sleeps feels not the toothache ; but a man that were to sleep your sleep , and a hangman to help him to bed , I think he would change places with his officer ; for look you , sir , you know not which way you shall go .

Yes , indeed do I , fellow .

Your death has eyes in 's head , then ; I have not seen him so pictured : you must either be directed by some that take upon them to know , or take upon yourself that which I am sure you do not know , or jump the after inquiry on your own peril : and how you shall speed in your journey's end , I think you'll never return to tell one .

I tell thee , fellow , there are none want eyes to direct them the way I am going but such as wink and will not use them .

What an infinite mock is this , that a man should have the best use of eyes to see the way of blindness ! I am sure hanging's the way of winking .


Knock off his manacles ; bring your prisoner to the king .

Thou bring'st good news ; I am called to be made free .

I'll be hang'd , then .

Thou shalt be then freer than a gaoler ; no bolts for the dead .


Unless a man would marry a gallows and beget young gibbets , I never saw one so prone . Yet , on my conscience , there are verier knaves desire to live , for all he be a Roman ; and there be some of them too , that die against their wills ; so should I , if I were one . I would we were all of one mind , and one mind good ; O ! there were desolation of gaolers and gallowses . I speak against my present profit , but my wish hath a preferment in 't .


Stand by my side , you whom the gods have made 
Preservers of my throne . Woe is my heart 
That the poor soldier that so richly fought ,
Whose rags sham'd gilded arms , whose naked breast 
Stepp'd before targes of proof , cannot be found :
He shall be happy that can find him , if 
Our grace can make him so .

I never saw 
Such noble fury in so poor a thing ;
Such precious deeds in one that promis'd nought 
But beggary and poor looks .

No tidings of him ?

He hath been search'd among the dead and living ,
But no trace of him .

To my grief , I am 
The heir of his reward ; which I will add 

To you , the liver , heart , and brain of Britain ,
By whom , I grant , she lives . 'Tis now the time 
To ask of whence you are : report it .

Sir ,
In Cambria are we born , and gentlemen :
Further to boast were neither true nor modest ,
Unless I add , we are honest .

Bow your knees .
Arise , my knights o' the battle : I create you 
Companions to our person , and will fit you 
With dignities becoming your estates .


There's business in these faces . Why so sadly 
Greet you our victory ? you look like Romans ,

And not o' the court of Britain .

Hail , great king !
To sour your happiness , I must report 
The queen is dead .

Whom worse than a physician 
Would this report become ? But I consider ,
By medicine life may be prolong'd , yet death 
Will seize the doctor too . How ended she ?

With horror , madly dying , like her life ;
Which , being cruel to the world , concluded 
Most cruel to herself . What she confess'd 
I will report , so please you : these her women 
Can trip me if I err ; who with wet cheeks 
Were present when she finish'd .

Prithee , say .

First , she confess'd she never lov'd you , only 
Affected greatness got by you , not you ;
Married your royalty , was wife to your place ;
Abhorr'd your person .

She alone knew this ;
And , but she spoke it dying , I would not 
Believe her lips in opening it . Proceed .

Your daughter , whom she bore in hand to love 
With such integrity , she did confess 
Was as a scorpion to her sight ; whose life ,
But that her flight prevented it , she had 
Ta'en off by poison .

O most delicate fiend !
Who is't can read a woman ? Is there more ?

More , sir , and worse . She did confess she had 
For you a mortal mineral ; which , being took ,
Should by the minute feed on life , and ling'ring ,
By inches waste you ; in which time she purpos'd ,
By watching , weeping , tendance , kissing , to 
O'ercome you with her show ; yea , and in time 
When she had fitted you with her craft to work 
Her son into the adoption of the crown ;
But failing of her end by his strange absence ,
Grew shameless-desperate ; open'd , in despite 
Of heaven and men , her purposes ; repented 
The evils she hatch'd were not effected : so ,
Despairing died .

Heard you all this , her women ?

We did , so please your highness .

Mine eyes 
Were not in fault , for she was beautiful ;
Mine ears , that heard her flattery ; nor my heart ,
That thought her like her seeming : it had been vicious 
To have mistrusted her : yet , O my daughter !
That it was folly in me , thou mayst say ,
And prove it in thy feeling . Heaven mend all !

Thou com'st not , Caius , now for tribute ; that 
The Britons have raz'd out , though with the loss 
Of many a bold one ; whose kinsmen have made suit 
That their good souls may be appeas'd with slaughter 
Of you their captives , which ourself have granted :

So , think of your estate .

Consider , sir , the chance of war : the day 
Was yours by accident ; had it gone with us ,
We should not , when the blood was cool , have threaten'd 
Our prisoners with the sword . But since the gods 
Will have it thus , that nothing but our lives 
May be call'd ransom , let it come ; sufficeth ,
A Roman with a Roman's heart can suffer ;
Augustus lives to think on 't ; and so much 
For my peculiar care . This one thing only 
I will entreat ; my boy , a Briton born ,
Let him be ransom'd ; never master had 
A page so kind , so duteous , diligent ,
So tender over his occasions , true ,
So feat , so nurse-like . Let his virtue join 
With my request , which I'll make bold your highness 
Cannot deny ; he hath done no Briton harm ,
Though he have serv'd a Roman . Save him , sir ,
And spare no blood beside .

I have surely seen him ;
His favour is familiar to me . Boy ,
Thou hast look'd thyself into my grace ,
And art mine own . I know not why nor wherefore ,
To say , 'live , boy :' ne'er thank thy master ; live :
And ask of Cymbeline what boon thou wilt ,
Fitting my bounty and thy state , I'll give it ;
Yea , though thou do demand a prisoner ,
The noblest ta'en .

I humbly thank your highness .

I do not bid thee beg my life , good lad ;
And yet I know thou wilt .

No , no ; alack !
There's other work in hand . I see a thing 
Bitter to me as death ; your life , good master ,
Must shuffle for itself .

The boy disdains me ,
He leaves me , scorns me ; briefly die their joys 
That place them on the truth of girls and boys .
Why stands he so perplex'd ?

What wouldst thou , boy ?
I love thee more and more ; think more and more 
What's best to ask . Know'st him thou look'st on ? speak ;
Wilt have him live ? Is he thy kin ? thy friend ?

He is a Roman ; no more kin to me 
Than I to your highness ; who , being born your vassal ,
Am something nearer .

Wherefore ey'st him so ?

I'll tell you , sir , in private , if you please 
To give me hearing .

Ay , with all my heart ,
And lend my best attention . What's thy name ?

Fidele , sir .

Thou'rt my good youth , my page ;
I'll be thy master : walk with me ; speak freely .


Is not this boy reviv'd from death ?

One sand another 
Not more resembles ;that sweet rosy lad 
Who died , and was Fidele . What think you ?

The same dead thing alive .

Peace , peace ! see further ; he eyes us not ; forbear ;
Creatures may be alike ; were 't he , I am sure 
He would have spoke to us .

But we saw him dead .

Be silent ; let's see further .

It is my mistress :
Since she is living , let the time run on 
To good , or bad .


Come , stand thou by our side :
Make thy demand aloud .

Sir , step you forth ;
Give answer to this boy , and do it freely ,
Or , by our greatness and the grace of it ,
Which is our honour , bitter torture shall 
Winnow the truth from falsehood . On , speak to him .

My boon is , that this gentleman may render 
Of whom he had this ring .

What's that to him ?

That diamond upon your finger , say 
How came it yours ?

Thou'lt torture me to leave unspoken that 
Which , to be spoke , would torture thee .

How ! me ?

I am glad to be constrain'd to utter that 
Which torments me to conceal . By villany 
I got this ring ; 'twas Leonatus' jewel ,
Whom thou didst banish , and which more may grieve thee ,
As it doth me a nobler sir ne'er liv'd 
'Twixt sky and ground . Wilt thou hear more , my lord ?

All that belongs to this .

That paragon , thy daughter ,
For whom my heart drops blood , and my false spirits 
Quail to remember ,Give me leave ; I faint .

My daughter ! what of her ? Renew thy strength ;
I had rather thou shouldst live while nature will 
Than die ere I hear more . Strive , man , and speak .

Upon a time ,unhappy was the clock 
That struck the hour !it was in Rome ,accurs'd 
The mansion where !'twas at a feast O , would 
Our viands had been poison'd , or at least 
Those which I heav'd to head !the good Posthumus ,
What should I say ? he was too good to be 
Where ill men were ; and was the best of all 
Amongst the rar'st of good ones ;sitting sadly 
Hearing us praise our loves of Italy 
For beauty that made barren the swell'd boast 
Of him that best could speak ; for feature laming 
The shrine of Venus , or straight-pight Minerva ,
Postures beyond brief nature ; for condition ,
A shop of all the qualities that man 
Loves woman for ; besides that hook of wiving ,
Fairness which strikes the eye .

I stand on fire .
Come to the matter .

All too soon I shall ,
Unless thou wouldst grieve quickly . This Posthumus 
Most like a noble lord in love , and one 
That had a royal lover took his hint ;
And , not dispraising whom we prais'd ,therein 
He was as calm as virtue ,he began 
His mistress' picture ; which by his tongue being made ,
And then a mind put in 't , either our brags 
Were crack'd of kitchen trulls , or his description 
Prov'd us unspeaking sots .

Nay , nay , to the purpose .

Your daughter's chastity , there it begins .
He spake of her as Dian had hot dreams ,
And she alone were cold ; whereat I , wretch ,
Made scruple of his praise , and wager'd with him 
Pieces of gold 'gainst this , which then he wore 
Upon his honour'd finger , to attain 
In suit the place of his bed , and win this ring 
By hers and mine adultery . He , true knight ,
No lesser of her honour confident 
Than I did truly find her , stakes this ring ;
And would so , had it been a carbuncle 
Of Ph bus' wheel ; and might so safely , had it 
Been all the worth of 's car . Away to Britain 
Post I in this design . Well may you , sir ,
Remember me at court , where I was taught 
Of your chaste daughter the wide difference 
'Twixt amorous and villanous . Being thus quench'd 
Of hope , not longing , mine Italian brain 
'Gan in your duller Britain operate 
Most vilely ; for my vantage , excellent ;
And , to be brief , my practice so prevail'd ,
That I return'd with simular proof enough 
To make the noble Leonatus mad ,
By wounding his belief in her renown 
With tokens thus , and thus ; averring notes 
Of chamber-hanging , pictures , this her bracelet ;
Oh cunning ! how I got it !nay , some marks 
Of secret on her person , that he could not 
But think her bond of chastity quite crack'd ,
I having ta'en the forfeit . Whereupon ,
Methinks I see him now ,

Ay , so thou dost ,
Italian fiend !Ay me , most credulous fool ,
Egregious murderer , thief , any thing 
That's due to all the villains past , in being ,
To come . O ! give me cord , or knife , or poison ,
Some upright justicer . Thou king , send out 
For torturers ingenious ; it is I 
That all the abhorred things o' the earth amend 
By being worse than they . I am Posthumus ,
That kill'd thy daughter ; villain-like , I lie ;
That caus'd a lesser villain than myself ,
A sacrilegious thief , to do 't ; the temple 
Of virtue was she ; yea , and she herself .
Spit , and throw stones , cast mire upon me , set 
The dogs o' the street to bay me ; every villain 
Be call'd Posthumus Leonatus ; and 
Be villany less than 'twas ! O Imogen !
My queen , my life , my wife ! O Imogen ,
Imogen , Imogen !

Peace , my lord ! hear , hear !

Shall 's have a play of this ? Thou scornful page ,
There lie thy part .


O , gentlemen , help !
Mine , and your mistress ! O ! my Lord Posthumus ,
You ne'er kill'd Imogen till now . Help , help !
Mine honour'd lady !

Does the world go round ?

How come these staggers on me ?

Wake , my mistress !

If this be so , the gods do mean to strike me 
To death with mortal joy .

How fares my mistress ?

O ! get thee from my sight :
Thou gav'st me poison : dangerous fellow , hence !
Breathe not where princes are .

The tune of Imogen !

Lady ,
The gods throw stones of sulphur on me , if 
That box I gave you was not thought by me 
A precious thing : I had it from the queen .

New matter still ?

It poison'd me .

O gods !
I left out one thing which the queen confess'd ,
Which must approve thee honest : 'If Pisanio 
Have ,' said she , 'given his mistress that confection 
Which I gave him for cordial , she is serv'd 
As I would serve a rat .' 

What's this , Cornelius ?

The queen , sir , very oft importun'd me 
To temper poisons for her , still pretending 
The satisfaction of her knowledge only 
In killing creatures vile , as cats and dogs ,
Of no esteem ; I , dreading that her purpose 
Was of more danger , did compound for her 
A certain stuff , which , being ta'en , would cease 
The present power of life , but in short time 
All offices of nature should again 
Do their due functions . Have you ta'en of it ?

Most like I did , for I was dead .

My boys ,
There was our error .

This is , sure , Fidele .

Why did you throw your wedded lady from you ?
Think that you are upon a rock ; and now 
Throw me again .


Hang there like fruit , my soul ,
Till the tree die !

How now , my flesh , my child !
What , mak'st thou me a dullard in this act ?
Wilt thou not speak to me ?

Your blessing , sir .

Though you did love this youth , I blame ye not ;
You had a motive for 't .

My tears that fall 
Prove holy water on thee ! Imogen ,
Thy mother's dead .

I am sorry for 't , my lord .

O , she was naught ; and long of her it was 
That we meet here so strangely ; but her son 
Is gone , we know not how , nor where .

My lord ,
Now fear is from me , I'll speak troth . Lord Cloten ,
Upon my lady's missing , came to me 
With his sword drawn , foam'd at the mouth , and swore 
If I discover'd not which way she was gone ,
It was my instant death . By accident ,
I had a feigned letter of my master's 
Then in my pocket , which directed him 
To seek her on the mountains near to Milford ;
Where , in a frenzy , in my master's garments ,
Which he enforc'd from me , away he posts 
With unchaste purpose and with oath to violate 
My lady's honour ; what became of him 
I further know not .

Let me end the story :
I slew him there .

Marry , the gods forfend !
I would not thy good deeds should from my lips 
Pluck a hard sentence : Prithee , valiant youth ,
Deny 't again .

I have spoke it , and I did it .

He was a prince .

A most incivil one . The wrongs he did me 
Were nothing prince-like ; for he did provoke me 
With language that would make me spurn the sea 
If it could so roar to me . I cut off 's head ;
And am right glad he is not standing here 
To tell this tale of mine .

I am sorry for thee :
By thine own tongue thou art condemn'd , and must 
Endure our law . Thou'rt dead .

That headless man 
I thought had been my lord .

Bind the offender ,
And take him from our presence .

Stay , sir king :
This man is better than the man he slew ,
As well descended as thyself ; and hath 
More of thee merited than a band of Clotens 
Had ever scar for .

Let his arms alone ;
They were not born for bondage .

Why , old soldier ,
Wilt thou undo the worth thou art unpaid for ,
By tasting of our wrath ? How of descent 
As good as we ?

In that he spake too far .

And thou shalt die for 't .

We will die all three :
But I will prove that two on 's are as good 
As I have given out him . My sons , I must 
For mine own part unfold a dangerous speech ,
Though , haply , well for you .

Your danger's ours .

And our good his .

Have at it , then , by leave .
Thou hadst , great king , a subject who was call'd 
Belarius .

What of him ? he is 
A banish'd traitor .

He it is that hath 
Assum'd this age : indeed , a banish'd man ;
I know not how a traitor .

Take him hence :
The whole world shall not save him .

Not too hot :
First pay me for the nursing of thy sons ;
And let it be confiscate all so soon 
As I have receiv'd it .

Nursing of my sons !

I am too blunt and saucy ; here's my knee :
Ere I arise I will prefer my sons ;
Then spare not the old father . Mighty sir ,
These two young gentlemen , that call me father ,
And think they are my sons , are none of mine ;
They are the issue of your loins , my liege ,
And blood of your begetting .

How ! my issue !

So sure as you your father's . I , old Morgan ,
Am that Belarius whom you sometime banish'd :
Your pleasure was my mere offence , my punishment 
Itself , and all my treason ; that I suffer'd 
Was all the harm I did . These gentle princes 
For such and so they are these twenty years 
Have I train'd up ; those arts they have as I 
Could put into them ; my breeding was , sir , as 
Your highness knows . Their nurse , Euriphile ,
Whom for the theft I wedded , stole these children 
Upon my banishment : I mov'd her to 't ,
Having receiv'd the punishment before ,
For that which I did then ; beaten for loyalty 
Excited me to treason . Their dear loss ,
The more of you 'twas felt the more it shap'd 
Unto my end of stealing them . But , gracious sir ,
Here are your sons again ; and I must lose 
Two of the sweet'st companions in the world .
The benediction of these covering heavens 
Fall on their heads like dew ! for they are worthy 
To inlay heaven with stars .

Thou weep'st , and speak'st .
The service that you three have done is more 
Unlike than this thou tell'st . I lost my children :
If these be they , I know not how to wish 
A pair of worthier sons .

Be pleas'd awhile .
This gentleman , whom I call Polydore ,
Most worthy prince , as yours , is true Guiderius ;
This gentleman , my Cadwal , Arviragus ,
Your younger princely son ; he , sir , was lapp'd 
In a most curious mantle , wrought by the hand 
Of his queen mother , which , for more probation ,
I can with ease produce .

Guiderius had 
Upon his neck a mole , a sanguine star ;
It was a mark of wonder .

This is he ,
Who hath upon him still that natural stamp .
It was wise nature's end in the donation ,
To be his evidence now .

O ! what , am I 
A mother to the birth of three ? Ne'er mother 
Rejoic'd deliverance more . Blest pray you be ,
That , after this strange starting from your orbs ,
You may reign in them now . O Imogen !
Thou hast lost by this a kingdom .

No , my lord ;
I have got two worlds by 't . O my gentle brothers !
Have we thus met ? O , never say hereafter 
But I am truest speaker : you call'd me brother ,
When I was but your sister ; I you brothers 
When ye were so indeed .

Did you e'er meet ?

Ay , my good lord .

And at first meeting lov'd ;
Continu'd so , until we thought he died .

By the queen's dram she swallow'd .

O rare instinct !
When shall I hear all through ? This fierce abridgment 
Hath to it circumstantial branches , which 
Distinction should be rich in . Where ? how liv'd you ?
And when came you to serve our Roman captive ?
How parted with your brothers ? how first met them ?
Why fied you from the court , and whither ? These ,
And your three motives to the battle , with 
I know not how much more , should be demanded ,
And all the other by-dependances ,
From chance to chance , but nor the time nor place 
Will serve our long inter'gatories . See ,
Posthumus anchors upon Imogen ,
And she , like harmless lightning , throws her eye 
On him , her brothers , me , her master , hitting 
Each object with a joy : the counterchange 
Is severally in all . Let's quit this ground ,
And smoke the temple with our sacrifices .


Thou art my brother ; so we'll hold thee ever .

You are my father too ; and did relieve me ,
To see this gracious season .

All o'erjoy'd 
Save these in bonds ; let them be joyful too ,
For they shall taste our comfort .

My good master ,
I will yet do you service .

Happy be you !

The forlorn soldier , that so nobly fought 
He would have well becom'd this place and grac'd 
The thankings of a king .

I am , sir ,
The soldier that did company these three 
In poor beseeming ; 'twas a fitment for 
The purpose I then follow'd . That I was he ,
Speak , Iachimo ; I had you down and might 
Have made you finish .

I am down again ;
But now my heavy conscience sinks my knee ,
As then your force did . Take that life , beseech you ,
Which I so often owe , but your ring first ,
And here the bracelet of the truest princess 
That ever swore her faith .

Kneel not to me :
The power that I have on you is to spare you ;
The malice towards you to forgive you . Live ,
And deal with others better .

Nobly doom'd :
We'll learn our freeness of a son-in-law ;
Pardon's the word to all .

You holp us , sir ,
As you did mean indeed to be our brother ;
Joy'd are we that you are .

Your servant , princes . Good my lord of Rome ,
Call forth your soothsayer . As I slept , methought 
Great Jupiter , upon his eagle back'd ,
Appear'd to me , with other spritely shows 
Of mine own kindred : when I wak'd , I found 
This label on my bosom ; whose containing 
Is so from sense in hardness that I can 
Make no collection of it ; let him show 
His skill in the construction .

Philarmonus !

Here , my good lord .

Read , and declare the meaning 

Whenas a lion's whelp shall , to himself unknown , without seeking find , and be embraced by a piece of tender air ; and when from a stately cedar shall be lopped branches , which , being dead many years , shall after revive , be jointed to the old stock , and freshly grow : then shall Posthumus end his miseries , Britain be fortunate , and flourish in peace and plenty .
Thou , Leonatus , art the lion's whelp ;
The fit and apt construction of thy name ,
Being Leo-natus , doth import so much .


The piece of tender air , thy virtuous daughter ,
Which we call mollis aer ; and mollis aer 
We term it mulier ; which mulier , I divine ,
Is this most constant wife ; who , even now ,
Answering the letter of the oracle ,
Unknown to you ,

unsought , were clipp'd about 
With this most tender air .

This hath some seeming .

The lofty cedar , royal Cymbeline ,
Personates thee , and thy lopp'd branches point 
Thy two sons forth ; who , by Belarius stolen ,
For many years thought dead , are now reviv'd 
To the majestic cedar join'd , whose issue 
Promises Britain peace and plenty .

Well ;
My peace we will begin . And , Caius Lucius ,
Although the victor , we submit to C sar ,
And to the Roman empire ; promising 
To pay our wonted tribute , from the which 
We were dissuaded by our wicked queen ;
Whom heavens in justice both on her and hers 
Have laid most heavy hand .

The fingers of the powers above do tune 
The harmony of this peace . The vision 
Which I made known to Lucius ere the stroke 
Of this yet scarce-cold battle , at this instant 
Is full accomplish'd ; for the Roman eagle ,
From south to west on wing soaring aloft ,
Lessen'd herself , and in the beams o' the sun 
So vanish'd : which foreshow'd our princely eagle ,
The imperial C sar , should again unite 
His favour with the radiant Cymbeline ,
Which shines here in the west .

Laud we the gods ;
And let our crooked smokes climb to their nostrils 
From our bless'd altars . Publish we this peace 
To all our subjects . Set we forward : let 
A Roman and a British ensign wave 
Friendly together ; so through Lud's town march :
And in the temple of great Jupiter 
Our peace we'll ratify ; seal it with feasts .
Set on there . Never was a war did cease ,
Ere bloody hands were wash'd , with such a peace .

LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST

Let fame , that all hunt after in their lives ,
Live register'd upon our brazen tombs ,
And then grace us in the disgrace of death ;
When , spite of cormorant devouring Time ,
The endeavour of this present breath may buy 
That honour which shall bate his scythe's keen edge ,
And make us heirs of all eternity .
Therefore , brave conquerors ,for so you are ,
That war against your own affections 
And the huge army of the world's desires ,
Our late edict shall strongly stand in force :
Navarre shall be the wonder of the world ;
Our court shall be a little academe ,
Still and contemplative in living art .
You three , Berowne , Dumaine , and Longaville ,
Have sworn for three years' term to live with me ,
My fellow-scholars , and to keep those statutes 
That are recorded in this schedule here :
Your oaths are pass'd ; and now subscribe your names ,
That his own hand may strike his honour down 
That violates the smallest branch herein .
If you are arm'd to do , as sworn to do ,
Subscribe to your deep oaths , and keep it too .

I am resolv'd ; 'tis but a three years' fast :
The mind shall banquet , though the body pine :
Fat paunches have lean pates , and dainty bits 
Make rich the ribs , but bankrupt quite the wits .

My loving lord , Dumaine is mortified :
The grosser manner of these world's delights 
He throws upon the gross world's baser slaves :
To love , to wealth , to pomp , I pine and die ;
With all these living in philosophy .

I can but say their protestation over ;
So much , dear liege , I have already sworn ,
That is , to live and study here three years .
But there are other strict observances ;
As , not to see a woman in that term ,
Which I hope well is not enrolled there :
And one day in a week to touch no food ,
And but one meal on every day beside ;
The which I hope is not enrolled there :
And then , to sleep but three hours in the night ,
And not be seen to wink of all the day ,
When I was wont to think no harm all night 
And make a dark night too of half the day ,
Which I hope well is not enrolled there .
O ! these are barren tasks , too hard to keep ,
Not to see ladies , study , fast , not sleep .

Your oath is pass'd to pass away from these .

Let me say no , my liege , an if you please .
I only swore to study with your Grace ,
And stay here in your court for three years' space .

You swore to that , Berowne , and to the rest .

By yea and nay , sir , then I swore in jest .
What is the end of study ? let me know .

Why , that to know which else we should not know .

Things hid and barr'd , you mean , from common sense ?

Ay , that is study's god-like recompense .

Come on then ; I will swear to study so ,
To know the thing I am forbid to know ;
As thus : to study where I well may dine ,
When I to feast expressly am forbid ;
Or study where to meet some mistress fine ,
When mistresses from common sense are hid ;
Or , having sworn too hard-a-keeping oath ,
Study to break it , and not break my troth .
If study's gain be thus , and this be so ,
Study knows that which yet it doth not know .
Swear me to this , and I will ne'er say no .

These be the stops that hinder study quite ,
And train our intellects to vain delight .

Why , all delights are vain ; but that most vain 
Which , with pain purchas'd doth inherit pain :
As , painfully to pore upon a book ,
To seek the light of truth ; while truth the while 
Doth falsely blind the eyesight of his look :
Light seeking light doth light of light beguile :
So , ere you find where light in darkness lies ,
Your light grows dark by losing of your eyes .
Study me how to please the eye indeed ,
By fixing it upon a fairer eye ,
Who dazzling so , that eye shall be his heed ,
And give him light that it was blinded by .
Study is like the heaven's glorious sun ,
That will not be deep-search'd with saucy looks ;
Small have continual plodders ever won ,
Save base authority from others' books .
These earthly godfathers of heaven's lights 
That give a name to every fixed star ,
Have no more profit of their shining nights 
Than those that walk and wot not what they are .
Too much to know is to know nought but fame ;
And every godfather can give a name .

How well he's read , to reason against reading !

Proceeded well , to stop all good proceeding !

He weeds the corn , and still lets grow the weeding .

The spring is near , when green geese are a-breeding .

How follows that ?

Fit in his place and time .

In reason nothing .

Something then , in rime .

Berowne is like an envious sneaping frost 
That bites the first-born infants of the spring .

Well , say I am : why should proud summer boast 
Before the birds have any cause to sing ?
Why should I joy in an abortive birth ?
At Christmas I no more desire a rose 
Than wish a snow in May's new-fangled mirth ;
But like of each thing that in season grows .
So you , to study now it is too late ,
Climb o'er the house to unlock the little gate .

Well , sit you out : go home , Berowne : adieu !

No , my good lord ; I have sworn to stay with you :
And though I have for barbarism spoke more 
Than for that angel knowledge you can say ,
Yet confident I'll keep to what I swore ,
And bide the penance of each three years' day .
Give me the paper ; let me read the same ;
And to the strict'st decrees I'll write my name .

How well this yielding rescues thee from shame !

Item , That no woman shall come within a mile of my court . Hath this been proclaimed ?

Four days ago .

Let's see the penalty . On pain of losing her tongue . Who devised this penalty ?

Marry , that did I .

Sweet lord , and why ?

To fright them hence with that dread penalty .

A dangerous law against gentility !

Item . If any man be seen to talk with a woman within the term of three years , he shall endure such public shame as the rest of the court can possibly devise .
This article , my liege , yourself must break ;
For well you know here comes in embassy 
The French king's daughter with yourself to speak 
A maid of grace and complete majesty 
About surrender up of Aquitaine 
To her decrepit , sick , and bed-rid father :
Therefore this article is made in vain ,
Or vainly comes th' admired princess hither .

What say you , lords ? why , this was quite forgot .

So study evermore is overshot :
While it doth study to have what it would ,
It doth forget to do the thing it should ;
And when it hath the thing it hunteth most ,
'Tis won as towns with fire ; so won , so lost .

We must of force dispense with this decree ;
She must lie here on mere necessity .

Necessity will make us all forsworn 
Three thousand times within this three years' space ;
For every man with his affects is born ,
Not by might master'd , but by special grace .
If I break faith this word shall speak for me ,
I am forsworn 'on mere necessity .' 
So to the laws at large I write my name :

And he that breaks them in the least degree 
Stands in attainder of eternal shame :
Suggestions are to others as to me ;
But I believe , although I seem so loath ,
I am the last that will last keep his oath .
But is there no quick recreation granted ?

Ay , that there is . Our court , you know , is haunted 
With a refined traveller of Spain ;
A man in all the world's new fashion planted ,
That hath a mint of phrases in his brain ;
One whom the music of his own vain tongue 
Doth ravish like enchanting harmony ;
A man of complements , whom right and wrong 
Have chose as umpire of their mutiny :
This child of fancy , that Armado hight ,
For interim to our studies shall relate 
In high-born words the worth of many a knight 
From tawny Spain lost in the world's debate .
How you delight , my lords , I know not , I ;
But , I protest , I love to hear him lie ,
And I will use him for my minstrelsy .

Armado is a most illustrious wight ,
A man of fire-new words , fashion's own knight .

Costard the swain and he shall be our sport ;
And , so to study , three years is but short .


Which is the duke's own person ?

This , fellow . What wouldst ?

I myself reprehend his own person , for I am his Grace's tharborough : but I would see his own person in flesh and blood .

This is he .

Signior Arm Arm commends you . There's villany abroad : this letter will tell you more .

Sir , the contempts thereof are as touching me .

A letter from the magnificent Armado .

How long soever the matter , I hope in God for high words .

A high hope for a low heaven : God grant us patience !

To hear , or forbear laughing ?

To hear meekly , sir , and to laugh moderately ; or to forbear both .

Well , sir , be it as the style shall give us cause to climb in the merriness .

The matter is to me , sir , as concerning Jaquenetta . The manner of it is , I was taken with the manner .

In what manner ?

In manner and form following , sir ; all those three : I was seen with her in the manor-house , sitting with her upon the form , and taken following her into the park ; which , put together , is , in manner and form following . Now , sir , for the manner ,it is the manner of a man to speak to a woman , for the form ,in some form .

For the following , sir ?

As it shall follow in my correction ; and God defend the right !

Will you hear this letter with attention ?

As we would hear an oracle .

Such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the flesh .

Great deputy , the welkin's vicegerent , and sole dominator of Navarre , my soul's earth's God , and body's fostering patron ,

Not a word of Costard yet .

So it is ,

It may be so ; but if he say it is so , he is , in telling true , but so .

Peace !

Be to me and every man that dares not fight .

No words !

Of other men's secrets , I beseech you .

So it is , besieged with sable-coloured melancholy , I did commend the black-oppressing humour to the most wholesome physic of thy health-giving air ; and , as I am a gentleman , betook myself to walk . The time when ? About the sixth hour ; when beasts most graze , birds best peck , and men sit down to that nourishment which is called supper : so much for the time when . Now for the ground which ; which , I mean , I walked upon : it is ycleped thy park . Then for the place where ; where , I mean , I did encounter that most obscene and preposterous event , that draweth from my snow-white pen the ebon-coloured ink , which here thou viewest , beholdest , surveyest , or seest . But to the place where , it standeth north-north-east and by east from the west corner of thy curious-knotted garden : there did I see that low-spirited swain , that base minnow of thy mirth ,

Me .

that unlettered small-knowing soul ,

Me .

that shallow vessel ,

Still me .

which , as I remember , hight Costard ,

O me .

sorted and consorted , contrary to thy established proclaimed edict and continent canon , with with ,O ! with but with this I passion to say wherewith ,

With a wench .

with a child of our grandmother Eve , a female ; or , for thy more sweet understanding , a woman . Him , I ,as my everesteemed duty pricks me on ,have sent to thee , to receive the meed of punishment , by thy sweet Grace's officer , Antony Dull ; a man of good repute , carriage , bearing , and estimation .

Me , an't please you ; I am Antony Dull .

For Jaquenetta ,so is the weaker vessel called which I apprehended with the aforesaid swain ,I keep her as a vessel of thy law's fury ; and shall , at the least of thy sweet notice , bring her to trial . Thine , in all compliments of devoted and heart-burning heat of duty ,

This is not so well as I looked for , but the best that ever I heard .

Ay , the best for the worst . But , sirrah , what say you to this ?

Sir , I confess the wench .

Did you hear the proclamation ?

I do confess much of the hearing it , but little of the marking of it .

It was proclaimed a year's imprisonment to be taken with a wench .

I was taken with none , sir : I was taken with a damosel .

Well , it was proclaimed 'damosel .' 

This was no damosel neither , sir : she was a 'virgin .' 

It is so varied too ; for it was proclaimed 'virgin .' 

If it were , I deny her virginity : I was taken with a maid .

This maid will not serve your turn , sir .

This maid will serve my turn , sir .

Sir , I will pronounce your sentence : you shall fast a week with bran and water .

I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge .

And Don Armado shall be your keeper .
My Lord Berowne , see him deliver'd o'er :
And go we , lords , to put in practice that 
Which each to other hath so strongly sworn .


I'll lay my head to any good man's hat ,
These oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn .
Sirrah , come on .

I suffer for the truth , sir : for true it is I was taken with Jaquenetta , and Jaquenetta is a true girl ; and therefore welcome the sour cup of prosperity ! Affliction may one day smile again ; and till then , sit thee down , sorrow !


Boy , what sign is it when a man of great spirit grows melancholy ?

A great sign , sir , that he will look sad .

Why , sadness is one and the self-same thing , dear imp .

No , no ; O Lord , sir , no .

How canst thou part sadness and melancholy , my tender juvenal ?

By a familiar demonstration of the working , my tough senior .

Why tough senior ? why tough senior ?

Why tender juvenal ? why tender juvenal ?

I spoke it , tender juvenal , as a congruent epitheton appertaining to thy young days , which we may nominate tender .

And I , tough senior , as an appertinent title to your old time , which we may name tough .

Pretty , and apt .

How mean you , sir ? I pretty , and my saying apt ? or I apt , and my saying pretty ?

Thou pretty , because little .

Little pretty , because little . Wherefore apt ?

And therefore apt , because quick .

Speak you this in my praise , master ?

In thy condign praise .

I will praise an eel with the same praise .

What ! that an eel is ingenious ?

That an eel is quick .

I do say thou art quick in answers : thou heatest my blood .

I am answered , sir .

I love not to be crossed .

He speaks the mere contrary : crosses love not him .

I have promised to study three years with the duke .

You may do it in an hour , sir .

Impossible .

How many is one thrice told ?

I am ill at reckoning ; it fitteth the spirit of a tapster .

You are a gentleman and a gamester , sir .

I confess both : they are both the varnish of a complete man .

Then , I am sure you know how much the gross sum of deuce-ace amounts to .

It doth amount to one more than two .

Which the base vulgar do call three .

True .

Why , sir , is this such a piece of study ? Now , here's three studied , ere you'll thrice wink ; and how easy it is to put 'years' to the word 'three ,' and study three years in two words , the dancing horse will tell you .

A most fine figure !

To prove you a cipher .

I will hereupon confess I am in love ; and as it is base for a soldier to love , so am I in love with a base wench . If drawing my sword against the humour of affection would deliver me from the reprobate thought of it , I would take Desire prisoner , and ransom him to any French courtier for a new devised curtsy . I think scorn to sigh : methinks I should outswear Cupid . Comfort me , boy : what great men have been in love ?

Hercules , master .

Most sweet Hercules ! More authority , dear boy , name more ; and , sweet my child , let them be men of good repute and carriage .

Samson , master : he was a man of good carriage , great carriage , for he carried the towngates on his back like a porter ; and he was in love .

O well-knit Samson ! strong-jointed Samson ! I do excel thee in my rapier as much as thou didst me in carrying gates . I am in love too . Who was Samson's love , my dear Moth ?

A woman , master .

Of what complexion ?

Of all the four , or the three , or the two , or one of the four .

Tell me precisely of what complexion .

Of the sea-water green , sir .

Is that one of the four complexions ?

As I have read , sir ; and the best of them too .

Green indeed is the colour of lovers ; but to have a love of that colour , methinks Samson had small reason for it . He surely affected her for her wit .

It was so , sir , for she had a green wit .

My love is most immaculate white and red .

Most maculate thoughts , master , are masked under such colours .

Define , define , well-educated infant .

My father's wit , and my mother's tongue , assist me !

Sweet invocation of a child ; most pretty and pathetical !


If she be made of white and red ,
Her faults will ne'er be known ,
For blushing cheeks by faults are bred ,
And fears by pale white shown :
Then if she fear , or be to blame ,
By this you shall not know ,
For still her cheeks possess the same 
Which native she doth owe .

A dangerous rime , master , against the reason of white and red .

Is there not a ballad , boy , of the King and the Beggar ?

The world was very guilty of such a ballad some three ages since ; but I think now 'tis not to be found ; or , if it were , it would neither serve for the writing nor the tune .

I will have that subject newly writ o'er , that I may example my digression by some mighty precedent . Boy , I do love that country girl that I took in the park with the rational hind Costard : she deserves well .

To be whipped ; and yet a better love than my master .

Sing , boy : my spirit grows heavy in love .

And that's great marvel , loving a light wench .

I say , sing .

Forbear till this company be past .


Sir , the duke's pleasure is , that you keep Costard safe : and you must let him take no delight nor no penance , but a' must fast three days a week . For this damsel , I must keep her at the park ; she is allowed for the day-woman .
Fare you well .

I do betray myself with blushing . Maid !

Man ?

I will visit thee at the lodge .

That's hereby .

I know where it is situate .

Lord , how wise you are !

I will tell thee wonders .

With that face ?

I love thee .

So I heard you say .

And so farewell .

Fair weather after you !

Come , Jaquenetta , away !


Villain , thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thou be pardoned .

Well , sir , I hope , when I do it , I shall do it on a full stomach .

Thou shalt be heavily punished .

I am more bound to you than your fellows , for they are but lightly rewarded .

Take away this villain : shut him up .

Come , you transgressing slave : away !

Let me not be pent up , sir : I will fast , being loose .

No , sir ; that were fast and loose : thou shalt to prison .

Well , if ever I do see the merry days of desolation that I have seen , some shall see 

What shall some see ?

Nay , nothing , Master Moth , but what they look upon . It is not for prisoners to be too silent in their words ; and therefore I will say nothing : I thank God I have as little patience as another man , and therefore I can be quiet .


I do affect the very ground , which is base , where her shoe , which is baser , guided by her foot , which is basest , doth tread . I shall be forsworn ,which is a great argument of falsehood ,if I love . And how can that be true love which is falsely attempted ? Love is a familiar ; Love is a devil : there is no evil angel but Love . Yet was Samson so tempted , and he had an excellent strength ; yet was Solomon so seduced , and he had a very good wit . Cupid's butt-shaft is too hard for Hercules' club , and therefore too much odds for a Spaniard's rapier . The first and second clause will not serve my turn ; the passado he respects not , the duello he regards not : his disgrace is to be called boy , but his glory is , to subdue men . Adieu , valour ! rust , rapier ! be still , drum ! for your manager is in love ; yea , he loveth . Assist me some extemporal god of rime , for I am sure I shall turn sonneter . Devise , wit ; write , pen ; for I am for whole volumes in folio .

Now , madam , summon up your dearest spirits :
Consider whom the king your father sends ,
To whom he sends , and what's his embassy :
Yourself , held precious in the world's esteem ,
To parley with the sole inheritor 
Of all perfections that a man may owe ,
Matchless Navarre ; the plea of no less weight 
Than Aquitaine , a dowry for a queen .
Be now as prodigal of all dear grace 
As Nature was in making graces dear 
When she did starve the general world beside ,
And prodigally gave them all to you .

Good Lord Boyet , my beauty , though but mean ,
Needs not the painted flourish of your praise :
Beauty is bought by judgment of the eye ,
Not utter'd by base sale of chapmen's tongues .
I am less proud to hear you tell my worth 
Than you much willing to be counted wise 
In spending your wit in the praise of mine .
But now to task the tasker : good Boyet ,
You are not ignorant , all-telling fame 
Doth noise abroad , Navarre hath made a vow ,
Till painful study shall out-wear three years ,
No woman may approach his silent court :
Therefore to us seemth it a needful course ,
Before we enter his forbidden gates ,
To know his pleasure ; and in that behalf ,
Bold of your worthiness , we single you 
As our best-moving fair solicitor .
Tell him , the daughter of the King of France ,
On serious business , craving quick dispatch ,
Importunes personal conference with his Grace .
Haste , signify so much ; while we attend ,
Like humble-visag'd suitors , his high will .

Proud of employment , willingly I go .

All pride is willing pride , and yours is so .

Who are the votaries , my loving lords ,
That are vow-fellows with this virtuous duke ?

Lord Longaville is one .

Know you the man ?

I know him , madam : at a marriage feast ,
Between Lord Perigort and the beauteous heir 
Of Jacques Falconbridge , solemnized 
In Normandy , saw I this Longaville .
A man of sovereign parts he is esteem'd ;
Well fitted in the arts , glorious in arms :
Nothing becomes him ill that he would well .
The only soil of his fair virtue's gloss ,
If virtue's gloss will stain with any soil ,
Is a sharp wit match'd with too blunt a will ;
Whose edge hath power to cut , whose will still wills 
It should none spare that come within his power .

Some merry mocking lord , belike ; is't so ?

They say so most that most his humours know .

Such short-liv'd wits do wither as they grow .
Who are the rest ?

The young Dumaine , a well-accomplish'd youth ,
Of all that virtue love for virtue lov'd :
Most power to do most harm , least knowing ill ,
For he hath wit to make an ill shape good ,
And shape to win grace though he had no wit .
I saw him at the Duke Alen on's once ;
And much too little of that good I saw 
Is my report to his great worthiness .

Another of these students at that time 
Was there with him , if I have heard a truth :
Berowne they call him ; but a merrier man ,
Within the limit of becoming mirth ,
I never spent an hour's talk withal .
His eye begets occasion for his wit ;
For every object that the one doth catch 
The other turns to a mirth-moving jest ,
Which his fair tongue , conceit's expositor ,
Delivers in such apt and gracious words ,
That aged ears play truant at his tales ,
And younger hearings are quite ravished ;
So sweet and voluble is his discourse .

God bless my ladies ! are they all in love ,
That every one her own hath garnished 
With such bedecking ornaments of praise ?

Here comes Boyet .


Now , what admittance , lord ?

Navarre had notice of your fair approach ;
And he and his competitors in oath 
Were all address'd to meet you , gentle lady ,
Before I came . Marry , thus much I have learnt ;
He rather means to lodge you in the field ,
Like one that comes here to besiege his court ,
Than seek a dispensation for his oath ,
To let you enter his unpeeled house .
Here comes Navarre .

Fair princess , welcome to the court of Navarre .

'Fair ,' I give you back again ; and 'welcome' I have not yet : the roof of this court is too high to be yours , and welcome to the wide fields too base to be mine .

You shall be welcome , madam , to my court .

I will be welcome , then : conduct me thither .

Hear me , dear lady ; I have sworn an oath .

Our Lady help my lord ! he'll be forsworn .

Not for the world , fair madam , by my will .

Why , will shall break it ; will , and nothing else .

Your ladyship is ignorant what it is .

Were my lord so , his ignorance were wise ,
Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance .
I hear your grace hath sworn out house-keeping :
'Tis deadly sin to keep that oath , my lord ,
And sin to break it .
But pardon me , I am too sudden-bold :
To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me .
Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming ,
And suddenly resolve me in my suit .


Madam , I will , if suddenly I may .

You will the sooner that I were away ,
For you'll prove perjur'd if you make me stay .

Did not I dance with you in Brabant once ?

Did not I dance with you in Brabant once ?

I know you did .

How needless was it then 
To ask the question !

You must not be so quick .

'Tis 'long of you that spur me with such questions .

Your wit's too hot , it speeds too fast , 'twill tire .

Not till it leave the rider in the mire .

What time o' day ?

The hour that fools should ask .

Now fair befall your mask !

Fair fall the face it covers !

And send you many lovers !

Amen , so you be none .

Nay , then I will be gone .

Madam , your father here doth intimate 
The payment of a hundred thousand crowns ;
Being but the one half of an entire sum 
Disbursed by my father in his wars .
But say that he , or we ,as neither have ,
Receiv'd that sum , yet there remains unpaid 
A hundred thousand more ; in surety of the which ,
One part of Aquitaine is bound to us ,
Although not valu'd to the money's worth .
If then the king your father will restore 
But that one half which is unsatisfied ,
We will give up our right in Aquitaine ,
And hold fair friendship with his majesty .
But that it seems , he little purposeth ,
For here he doth demand to have repaid 
A hundred thousand crowns ; and not demands ,
On payment of a hundred thousand crowns ,
To have his title live in Aquitaine ;
Which we much rather had depart withal ,
And have the money by our father lent ,
Than Aquitaine , so gelded as it is .
Dear princess , were not his requests so far 
From reason's yielding , your fair self should make 
A yielding 'gainst some reason in my breast ,
And go well satisfied to France again .

You do the king my father too much wrong 
And wrong the reputation of your name ,
In so unseeming to confess receipt 
Of that which hath so faithfully been paid .

I do protest I never heard of it ;
And if you prove it , I'll repay it back 
Or yield up Aquitaine .

We arrest your word .
Boyet , you can produce acquittances 
For such a sum from special officers 
Of Charles his father .

Satisfy me so .

So please your Grace , the packet is not come 
Where that and other specialties are bound :
To-morrow you shall have a sight of them .

It shall suffice me : at which interview 
All liberal reason I will yield unto .
Meantime , receive such welcome at my hand 
As honour , without breach of honour , may 
Make tender of to thy true worthiness .
You may not come , fair princess , in my gates ;
But here without you shall be so receiv'd ,
As you shall deem yourself lodg'd in my heart ,
Though so denied fair harbour in my house .
Your own good thoughts excuse me , and farewell :
To-morrow shall we visit you again .

Sweet health and fair desires consort your Grace !

Thy own wish wish I thee in every place !


Lady , I will commend you to mine own heart .

Pray you , do my commendations ; I would be glad to see it .

I would you heard it groan .

Is the fool sick ?

Sick at the heart .

Alack ! let it blood .

Would that do it good ?

My physic says , 'ay .' 

Will you prick't with your eye ?

No point , with my knife .

Now , God save thy life !

And yours from long living !

I cannot stay thanksgiving .


Sir , I pray you , a word : what lady is that same ?

The heir of Alen on , Katharine her name .

A gallant lady . Monsieur , fare you well .


I beseech you a word : what is she in the white ?

A woman sometimes , an you saw her in the light .

Perchance light in the light . I desire her name .

She hath but one for herself ; to desire that , were a shame .

Pray you , sir , whose daughter ?

Her mother's , I have heard .

God's blessing on your beard !

Good sir , be not offended .
She is an heir of Falconbridge .

Nay , my choler is ended .
She is a most sweet lady .

Not unlike , sir ; that may be .


What's her name , in the cap ?

Rosaline , by good hap .

Is she wedded or no ?

To her will , sir , or so .

You are welcome , sir . Adieu .

Farewell to me , sir , and welcome to you .


That last is Berowne , the merry mad-cap lord :
Not a word with him but a jest .

And every jest but a word .

It was well done of you to take him at his word .

I was as willing to grapple , as he was to board .

Two hot sheeps , marry !

And wherefore not ships ?
No sheep , sweet lamb , unless we feed on your lips .

You sheep , and I pasture : shall that finish the jest ?

So you grant pasture for me .


Not so , gentle beast .
My lips are no common , though several they be .

Belonging to whom ?

To my fortunes and me .

Good wits will be jangling ; but , gentles , agree .
This civil war of wits were much better us'd 
On Navarre and his book-men , for here 'tis abus'd .

If my observation ,which very seldom lies ,
By the heart's still rhetoric disclosed with eyes ,
Deceive me not now , Navarre is infected .

With what ?

With that which we lovers entitle affected .

Your reason .

Why , all his behaviours did make their retire 
To the court of his eye , peeping thorough desire ;
His heart , like an agate , with your print impress'd ,
Proud with his form , in his eye pride express'd :
His tongue , all impatient to speak and not see ,
Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be ;
All senses to that sense did make their repair ,
To feel only looking on fairest of fair ,
Methought all his senses were lock'd in his eye ,
As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy ;
Who , tend'ring their own worth from where they were glass'd ,
Did point you to buy them , along as you pass'd .
His face's own margent did quote such amazes ,
That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes .
I'll give you Aquitaine , and all that is his ,
An' you give him for my sake but one loving kiss .

Come to our pavilion : Boyet is dispos'd .

But to speak that in words which his eye hath disclos'd .
I only have made a mouth of his eye ,
By adding a tongue which I know will not he .

Thou art an old love-monger , and speak'st skilfully .

He is Cupid's grandfather and learns news of him .

Then was Venus like her mother , for her father is but grim .

Do you hear , my mad wenches ?

No .

What , then , do you see ?

Ay , our way to be gone .

You are too hard for me .

Warble , child ; make passionate my sense of hearing .

Concolinel ,

Sweet air ! Go , tenderness of years ; take this key , give enlargement to the swain , bring him festinately hither ; I must employ him in a letter to my love .

Master , will you win your love with a French brawl ?

How meanest thou ? brawling in French ?

No , my complete master ; but to jig off a tune at the tongue's end , canary to it with your feet , humour it with turning up your eyelids , sigh a note and sing a note , sometime through the throat , as if you swallowed love by singing love , sometime through the nose , as if you snuffed up love by smelling love ; with your hat penthouse-like o'er the shop of your eyes ; with your arms crossed on your thin belly-doublet like a rabbit on a spit ; or your hands in your pocket like a man after the old painting ; and keep not too long in one tune , but a snip and away . These are complements , these are humours , these betray nice wenches , that would be betrayed without these ; and make them men of note ,do you note me ?that most are affected to these .

How hast thou purchased this experience ?

By my penny of observation .

But O but O ,

'The hobby-horse is forgot .' 

Callest thou my love 'hobby-horse ?' 

No , master ; the hobby-horse is but a colt , and your love perhaps , a hackney . But have you forgot your love ?

Almost I had .

Negligent student ! learn her by heart .

By heart , and in heart , boy .

And out of heart , master : all those three I will prove .

What wilt thou prove ?

A man , if I live ; and this , by , in , and without , upon the instant : by heart you love her , because your heart cannot come by her ; in heart you love her , because your heart is in love with her ; and out of heart you love her , being out of heart that you cannot enjoy her .

I am all these three .

And three times as much more , and yet nothing at all .

Fetch hither the swain : he must carry me a letter .

A message well sympathized : a horse to be ambassador for an ass .

Ha , ha ! what sayest thou ?

Marry , sir , you must send the ass upon the horse , for he is very slow-gaited . But I go .

The way is but short : away !

As swift as lead , sir .

Thy meaning , pretty ingenious ?
Is not lead a metal heavy , dull , and slow ?

Minime , honest master ; or rather , master , no .

I say , lead is slow .

You are too swift , sir , to say so :
Is that lead slow which is fir'd from a gun ?

Sweet smoke of rhetoric !
He reputes me a cannon ; and the bullet , that's he :
I shoot thee at the swain .

Thump then , and I flee .


A most acute juvenal ; volable and free of grace !
By thy favour , sweet welkin , I must sigh in thy face :
Most rude melancholy , valour gives thee place .
My herald is return'd .


A wonder , master ! here's a costard broken in a shin .

Some enigma , some riddle : come , thy l'envoy ; begin .

No egma , no riddle , no l'envoy ; no salve in the mail , sir . O ! sir , plantain , a plain plantain : no l'envoy , no l'envoy : no salve , sir , but a plantain .

By virtue , thou enforcest laughter ; thy silly thought , my spleen ; the heaving of my lungs provokes me to ridiculous smiling : O ! pardon me , my stars . Doth the inconsiderate take salve for l'envoy , and the word l'envoy for a salve ?

Do the wise think them other ? is not l'envoy a salve ?

No , page : it is an epilogue or discourse , to make plain 
Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain .
I will example it :

The fox , the ape , and the humble-bee 
Were still at odds , being but three .

There's the moral . Now the l'envoy .

I will add the l'envoy . Say the moral again .


The fox , the ape , and the humble-bee ,
Were still at odds , being but three .

Until the goose came out of door ,
And stay'd the odds by adding four .

Now will I begin your moral , and do you follow with my l'envoy .

The fox , the ape , and the humble-bee ,
Were still at odds , being but three .

Until the goose came out of door ,
Staying the odds by adding four .


A good l'envoy , ending in the goose .
Would you desire more ?

The boy hath sold him a bargain , a goose , that's flat .
Sir , your pennyworth is good an your goose be fat .
To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose :
Let me see ; a fat l'envoy ; ay , that's a fat goose .

Come hither , come hither . How did this argument begin ?

By saying that a costard was broken in a shin .
Then call'd you for the l'envoy .

True , and I for a plantain : thus came your argument in ;
Then the boy's fat l'envoy , the goose that you bought ;
And he ended the market .

But tell me ; how was there a costard broken in a shin ?

I will tell you sensibly .

Thou hast no feeling of it , Moth : I will speak that l'envoy :
I , Costard , running out , that was safely within ,
Fell over the threshold and broke my shin .

We will talk no more of this matter .

Till there be more matter in the shin .

Sirrah Costard , I will enfranchise thee .

O ! marry me to one Frances : I smell some l'envoy , some goose , in this .

By my sweet soul , I mean setting thee at liberty , enfreedoming thy person : thou wert immured , restrained , captivated , bound .

True , true , and now you will be my purgation and let me loose .

I give thee thy liberty , set thee from durance ; and in lieu thereof , impose upon thee nothing but this :

Bear this significant to the country maid Jaquenetta . [Giving money .] There is remuneration ; for the best ward of mine honour is rewarding my dependents . Moth , follow .


Like the sequel , I . Signior Costard , adieu .

My sweet ounce of man's flesh ! my incony Jew !

Now will I look to his remuneration . Remuneration ! O ! that's the Latin word for three farthings : three farthings , remuneration . 'What's the price of this inkle ?' 'One penny .' 'No , I'll give you a remuneration :' why , it carries it Remuneration ! why , it is a fairer name than French crown . I will never buy and sell out of this word .


O ! my good knave Costard , exceedingly well met .

Pray you , sir , how much carnation riband may a man buy for a remuneration ?

What is a remuneration ?

Marry , sir , halfpenny farthing .

Why then , three-farthing-worth of silk .

I thank your worship . God be wi' you !

Stay , slave ; I must employ thee :
As thou wilt win my favour , good my knave ,
Do one thing for me that I shall entreat .

When would you have it done , sir ?

O , this afternoon .

Well , I will do it , sir ! fare you well .

O , thou knowest not what it is .

I shall know , sir , when I have done it .

Why , villain , thou must know first .

I will come to your worship to-morrow morning .

It must be done this afternoon . Hark , slave , it is but this :
The princess comes to hunt here in the park ,
And in her train there is a gentle lady :
When tongues speak sweetly , then they name her name ,
And Rosaline they call her : ask for her 
And to her white hand see thou do commend 
This seal'd-up counsel .

There's thy guerdon : go .

Gardon , O sweet gardon ! better than remuneration ; a 'leven-pence farthing better .
Most sweet gardon ! I will do it , sir , in print 
Gardon ! remuneration !


And I ,
Forsooth , in love ! I , that have been love's whip ;
A very beadle to a humorous sigh ;
A critic , nay , a night-watch constable ,
A domineering pedant o'er the boy ,
Than whom no mortal so magnificent !
This wimpled , whining , purblind , wayward boy ,
This senior-junior , giant-dwarf , Dan Cupid ;
Regent of love-rimes , lord of folded arms ,
The anointed sovereign of sighs and groans ,
Liege of all loiterers and malecontents ,
Dread prince of plackets , king of codpieces ,
Sole imperator and great general 
Of trotting 'paritors : O my little heart !
And I to be a corporal of his field ,
And wear his colours like a tumbler's hoop !
What I ! I love ! I sue ! I seek a wife !
A woman that is like a German clock ,
Still a-repairing , ever out of frame ,
And never going aright , being a watch ,
But being watch'd that it may still go right !
Nay , to be perjur'd , which is worst of all ;
And , among three , to love the worst of all ;
A wightly wanton with a velvet brow ,
With two pitch balls stuck in her face for eyes ;
Ay , and , by heaven , one that will do the deed 
Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard :
And I to sigh for her ! to watch for her !
To pray for her ! Go to ; it is a plague 
That Cupid will impose for my neglect 
Of his almighty dreadful little might .
Well , I will love , write , sigh , pray , sue , and groan :
Some men must love my lady , and some Joan .

Was that the king , that spurr'd his horse so hard 
Against the steep uprising of the hill ?

I know not ; but I think it was not he .

Whoe'er a' was , a' show'd a mounting mind .
Well , lords , to-day we shall have our dispatch ;
On Saturday we will return to France .
Then , forester , my friend , where is the bush 
That we must stand and play the murderer in ?

Hereby , upon the edge of yonder coppice ;
A stand where you may make the fairest shoot .

I thank my beauty , I am fair that shoot ,
And thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot .

Pardon me , madam , for I meant not so .

What , what ? first praise me , and again say no ?
O short-liv'd pride ! Not fair ? alack for woe !

Yes , madam , fair .

Nay , never paint me now :
Where fair is not , praise cannot mend the brow .
Here , good my glass :

Take this for telling true :
Fair payment for foul words is more than due .

Nothing but fair is that which you inherit .

See , see ! my beauty will be sav'd by merit .
O heresy in fair , fit for these days !
A giving hand , though foul , shall have fair praise .
But come , the bow : now mercy goes to kill ,
And shooting well is then accounted ill .
Thus will I save my credit in the shoot :
Not wounding , pity would not let me do't ;
If wounding , then it was to show my skill ,
That more for praise than purpose meant to kill .
And out of question so it is sometimes ,
Glory grows guilty of detested crimes ,
When , for fame's sake , for praise , an outward part ,
We bend to that the working of the heart ;
As I for praise alone now seek to spill 
The poor deer's blood , that my heart means no ill .

Do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty 
Only for praise' sake , when they strive to be 
Lords o'er their lords ?

Only for praise ; and praise we may afford 
To any lady that subdues a lord .


Here comes a member of the commonwealth .

God dig-you-den all ! Pray you , which is the head lady ?

Thou shalt know her , fellow , by the rest that have no heads .

Which is the greatest lady , the highest ?

The thickest , and the tallest .

The thickest , and the tallest ! it is so ; truth is truth .
An your waist , mistress , were as slender as my wit ,
One o'these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit .
Are not you the chief woman ? you are the thickest here .

What's your will , sir ? what's your will ?

I have a letter from Monsieur Berowne to one Lady Rosaline .

O ! thy letter , thy letter ; he's a good friend of mine .
Stand aside , good bearer . Boyet , you can carve ;
Break up this capon .

I am bound to serve .
This letter is mistook ; it importeth none here :
It is writ to Jaquenetta .

We will read it , I swear .
Break the neck of the wax , and every one give ear .

By heaven , that thou art fair , is most infallible ; true , that thou art beauteous ; truth itself , that thou art lovely . More fairer than fair , beautiful than beauteous , truer than truth itself , have commiseration on thy heroical vassal ! The magnanimous and most illustrate king Cophetua set eye upon the pernicious and indubitate beggar Zenelophon , and he it was that might rightly say veni , vidi , vici ; which to anatomize in the vulgar O base and obscure vulgar !videlicet , he came , saw , and overcame : he came , one ; saw , two ; overcame , three . Who came ? the king : Why did he come ? to see : Why did he see ? to overcome : To whom came he ? to the beggar : What saw he ? the beggar . Whom overcame he ? the beggar . The conclusion is victory : on whose side ? the king's ; the captive is enriched : on whose side ? the beggar's . The catastrophe is a nuptial : on whose side ? the king's , no , on both in one , or one in both . I am the king , for so stands the comparison ; thou the beggar , for so witnesseth thy lowliness . Shall I command thy love ? I may : Shall I enforce thy love ? I could : Shall I entreat thy love ? I will . What shalt thou exchange for rags ? robes ; for tittles ? titles ; for thyself ? me . Thus , expecting thy reply , I profane my lips on thy foot , my eyes on thy picture , and my heart on thy every part .
Thine , in the dearest design of Industry , DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO .
Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar 
'Gainst thee , thou lamb , that standest as his prey :
Submissive fall his princely feet before ,
And he from forage will incline to play .
But if thou strive , poor soul , what art thou then ?
Food for his rage , repasture for his den .

What plume of feathers is he that indited this letter ?
What vane ? what weathercock ? did you ever hear better ?

I am much deceiv'd but I remember the style .

Else your memory is bad , going o'er it erewhile .

This Armado is a Spaniard , that keeps here in court ;
A phantasime , a Monarcho , and one that makes sport 
To the prince and his book-mates .

Thou , fellow , a word .
Who gave thee this letter ?

I told you ; my lord .

To whom shouldst thou give it ?

From my lord to my lady .

From which lord , to which lady ?

From my lord Berowne , a good master of mine ,
To a lady of France , that he call'd Rosaline .

Thou hast mistaken his letter . Come , lords , away .
Here , sweet , put up this : 'twill be thine another day .


Who is the suitor ? who is the suitor ?

Shall I teach you to know ?

Ay , my continent of beauty .

Why , she that bears the bow .
Finely put off !

My lady goes to kill horns ; but , if thou marry ,
Hang me by the neck if horns that year miscarry .
Finely put on !

Well then , I am the shooter .

And who is your deer ?

If we choose by the horns , yourself : come not near .
Finely put on , indeed !

You still wrangle with her , Boyet , and she strikes at the brow .

But she herself is hit lower : have I hit her now ?

Shall I come upon thee with an old saying , that was a man when King Pepin of France was a little boy , as touching the hit it ?

So may I answer thee with one as old , that was a woman when Queen Guinever of Britain was a little wench , as touching the hit it .


Thou canst not hit it , hit it , hit it ,
Thou canst not hit it , my good man .

An I cannot , cannot , cannot ,
An I cannot , another can .

By my troth , most pleasant : how both did fit it !

A mark marvellous well shot , for they both did hit it .

A mark ! O ! mark but that mark ; a mark , says my lady !
Let the mark have a prick in't , to mete at , if it may be .

Wide o' the bow hand ! i' faith your hand is out .

Indeed a' must shoot nearer , or he'll ne'er hit the clout .

An' if my hand be out , then belike your hand is in .

Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin .

Come , come , you talk greasily ; your lips grow foul .

She's too hard for you at pricks , sir : challenge her to bowl .

I fear too much rubbing . Good night , my good owl .


By my soul , a swain ! a most simple clown !
Lord , lord how the ladies and I have put him down !
O' my troth , most sweet jests ! most incony vulgar wit !
When it comes so smoothly off , so obscenely , as it were , so fit ,
Armado , o' the one side , O ! a most dainty man .
To see him walk before a lady , and to bear her fan !
To see him kiss his hand ! and how most sweetly a' will swear !
And his page o' t'other side , that handful of wit !
Ah ! heavens , it is a most pathetical nit .


Sola , sola !


Very reverend sport , truly : and done in the testimony of a good conscience .

The deer was , as you know , sanguis , in blood ; ripe as a pomewater , who now hangeth like a jewel in the ear of c lo , the sky , the welkin , the heaven ; and anon falleth like a crab on the face of terra , the soil , the land , the earth .

Truly , Master Holofernes , the epithets are sweetly varied , like a scholar at the least : but , sir , I assure ye , it was a buck of the first head .

Sir Nathaniel , haud credo .

'Twas not a haud credo ; 'twas a pricket .

Most barbarous intimation ! yet a kind of insinuation , as it were , in via , in way , of explication ; facere , as it were , replication , or , rather , ostentare , to show , as it were , his inclination ,after his undressed , unpolished , uneducated , unpruned , untrained , or , rather , unlettered , or , ratherest , unconfirmed fashion ,to insert again my haud credo for a deer .

I said the deer was not a haud credo ; 'twas a pricket .

Twice sod simplicity , bis coctus !
O ! thou monster Ignorance , how deformed dost thou look !

Sir , he hath not fed of the dainties that are bred of a book ;
he hath not eat paper , as it were ; he hath not drunk ink : his intellect is not replenished ; he is only an animal , only sensible in the duller parts :
And such barren plants are set before us , that we thankful should be ,
Which we of taste and feeling are , for those parts that do fructify in us more than he ;
For as it would ill become me to be vain , indiscreet , or a fool :
So , were there a patch set on learning , to see him in a school :
But , omne bene , say I ; being of an old Father's mind ,
Many can brook the weather that love not the wind .

You two are book-men : can you tell by your wit ,
What was a month old at Cain's birth , that's not five weeks old as yet ?

Dictynna , goodman Dull : Dictynna , goodman Dull .

What is Dictynna ?

A title to Ph be , to Luna , to the moon .

The moon was a month old when Adam was no more ;
And raught not to five weeks when he came to five-score .
The allusion holds in the exchange .

'Tis true indeed : the collusion holds in the exchange .

God comfort thy capacity ! I say , the allusion holds in the exchange .

And I say the pollusion holds in the exchange , for the moon is never but a month old ; and I say beside that 'twas a pricket that the princess killed .

Sir Nathaniel , will you hear an extemporal epitaph on the death of the deer ? and , to humour the ignorant , I have call'd the deer the princess killed , a pricket .

Perge , good Master Holofernes , perge ; so it shall please you to abrogate scurrility .

I will something affect the letter ; for it argues facility .

The preyful princess pierc'd and prick'd a pretty pleasing pricket ;
Some say a sore ; but not a sore , till now made sore with shooting .
The dogs did yell ; put l to sore , then sorel jumps from thicket ;
Or pricket , sore , or else sorel ; the people fall a hooting .
If sore be sore , then l to sore makes fifty sores one sorel !
Of one sore I a hundred make , by adding but one more l .


A rare talent !

If a talent be a claw , look how he claws him with a talent .

This is a gift that I have , simple , simple ; a foolish extravagant spirit , full of forms , figures , shapes , objects , ideas , apprehensions , motions , revolutions : these are begot in the ventricle of memory , nourished in the womb of pia mater , and delivered upon the mellowing of occasion . But the gift is good in those in whom it is acute , and I am thankful for it .

Sir , I praise the Lord for you , and so may my parishioners ; for their sons are well tutored by you , and their daughters profit very greatly under you : you are a good member of the commonwealth .

Mehercle ! if their sons be ingenuous , they shall want no instruction ; if their daughters be capable , I will put it to them . But , vir sapit qui pauca loquitur . A soul feminine saluteth us .


God give you good morrow , Master parson .

Master parson , quasi pers-on . An if one should be pierced , which is the one ?

Marry , Master schoolmaster , he that is likest to a hogshead .

Piercing a hogshead ! a good lustre of conceit in a turf of earth ; fire enough for a flint , pearl enough for a swine : 'tis pretty ; it is well .

Good Master parson 

be so good as read me this letter : it was given me by Costard , and sent me from Don Armado : I beseech you , read it .

Fauste , precor gelida quando pecus omne sub umbra Ruminat , and so forth . Ah ! good old Mantuan . I may speak of thee as the traveller doth of Venice :

Venetia , Venetia ,
Chi non te vede , non te pretia .

Old Mantuan ! old Mantuan ! Who understandeth thee not , loves thee not . Ut , re , sol , la , mi , fa . Under pardon , sir , what are the contents ? or , rather , as Horace says in his What , my soul , verses ?

Ay , sir , and very learned .

Let me hear a staff , a stanze , a verse : lege , domine .


If love make me forsworn , how shall I swear to love ?
Ah ! never faith could hold , if not to beauty vow'd ;
Though to myself forsworn , to thee I'll faithful prove ;
Those thoughts to me were oaks , to thee like osiers bow'd 
Study his bias leaves and makes his book thine eyes .
Where all those pleasures live that art would comprehend :
If knowledge be the mark , to know thee shall suffice 
Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend ;
All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder ;
Which is to me some praise that I thy parts admire 
Thy eye Jove's lightning bears , thy voice his dreadful thunder ,
Which , not to anger bent , is music and sweet fire .
Celestial as thou art , O ! pardon love this wrong .
That sings heaven's praise with such an earthly tongue !


You find not the apostrophas , and so miss the accent : let me supervise the canzonet . Here are only numbers ratified ; but , for the elegancy , facility , and golden cadence of poesy , caret . Ovidius Naso was the man : and why , indeed , Naso , but for smelling out the odoriferous flowers of fancy , the jerks of invention ? Imitari is nothing ; so doth the hound his master , the ape his keeper , the 'tired horse his rider . But , damosella virgin , was this directed to you ?

Ay , sir ; from one Monsieur Berowne , one of the strange queen's lords .

I will overglance the superscript . To the snow-white hand of the most beauteous Lady Rosaline . I will look again on the intellect of the letter , for the nomination of the party writing to the person written unto : Your ladyship's , in all desired employment ,


Good Costard , go with me . Sir , God save your life !

Have with thee , my girl .


Sir , you have done this in the fear of God , very religiously ; and , as a certain Father saith 

Sir , tell not me of the Father ; I do fear colourable colours . But to return to the verses : did they please you , Sir Nathaniel ?

Marvellous well for the pen .

I do dine to-day at the father's of a certain pupil of mine ; where , if before repast it shall please you to gratify the table with a grace , I will , on my privilege I have with the parents of the foresaid child or pupil , undertake your ben venuto ; where I will prove those verses to be very unlearned , neither savouring of poetry , wit , nor invention . I beseech your society .

And thank you too ; for society saith the text is the happiness of life .

And , certes , the text most infallibly concludes it .[To 

The king he is hunting the deer ; I am coursing myself : they have pitched a toil ; I am toiling in a pitch ,pitch that defiles : defile ! a foul word ! Well , sit thee down , sorrow ! for so they say the fool said , and so say I , and I the fool : well proved , wit ! By the Lord , this love is as mad as Ajax : it kills sheep : it kills me , I a sheep : well proved again o' my side ! I will not love ; if I do , hang me ; i' faith , I will not . O ! but her eye ,by this light , but for her eye , I would not love her ; yes , for her two eyes . Well , I do nothing in the world but lie , and lie in my throat . By heaven , I do love , and it hath taught me to rime , and to be melancholy ; and here is part of my rime , and here my melancholy . Well , she hath one o' my sonnets already : the clown bore it , the fool sent it , and the lady hath it : sweet clown , sweeter fool , sweetest lady ! By the world , I would not care a pin if the other three were in . Here comes one with a paper : God give him grace to groan !

Ah me !

Shot , by heaven ! Proceed , sweet Cupid : thou hast thumped him with thy bird-bolt under the left pap . In faith , secrets !


So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not 
To those fresh morning drops upon the rose ,
As thy eye-beams , when their fresh rays have smote 
The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows :
Nor shines the silver moon one half so bright 
Through the transparent bosom of the deep ,
As doth thy face through tears of mine give light ,
Thou shin'st in every tear that I do weep .
No drop but as a coach doth carry thee ;
So ridest thou triumphing in my woe .
Do but behold the tears that swell in me ,
And they thy glory through my grief will show 
But do not love thyself , then thou wilt keep 
My tears for glasses , and still make me weep .
O queen of queens ! how far thou dost excel ,
No thought can think , nor tongue of mortal tell 

How shall she know my griefs ? I'll drop the paper :
Sweet leaves , shade folly . Who is he comes here ?

What , Longaville ! and reading ! listen , ear .


Now , in thy likeness , one more fool appear !

Ay me ! I am forsworn .

Why , he comes in like a perjure , wearing papers .

In love , I hope : sweet fellowship in shame !

One drunkard loves another of the name .

Am I the first that have been perjur'd so ?

I could put thee in comfort : not by two that I know :
Thou mak'st the triumviry , the corner-cap of society ,
The shape of love's Tyburn , that hangs up simplicity .

I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move .
O sweet Maria , empress of my love !
These numbers will I tear , and write in prose .

O ! rimes are guards on wanton Cupid's hose :
Disfigure not his slop .

This same shall go .

Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye ,
'Gainst whom the world cannot hold argument ,
Persuade my heart to this false perjury ?
Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment .
A woman I forswore ; but I will prove ,
Thou being a goddess , I forswore not thee :
My vow was earthly , thou a heavenly love ;
Thy grace , being gain'd , cures all disgrace in me .
Vows are but breath , and breath a vapour is :
Then thou , fair sun , which on my earth dost shine ,
Exhal'st this vapour-vow ; in thee it is :
If broken , then , it is no fault of mine :
If by me broke , what fool is not so wise 
To lose an oath to win a paradise !


This is the liver-vein , which makes flesh a deity ;
A green goose a goddess ; pure , pure idolatry .
God amend us , God amend ! we are much out o' the way .

By whom shall I send this ?Company ! stay .


All hid , all hid ; an old infant play .
Like a demi-god here sit I in the sky ,
And wretched fools' secrets heedfully o'er-eye .
More sacks to the mill ! O heavens ! I have my wish .

Dumaine transform'd : four woodcocks in a dish !

O most divine Kate !

O most profane coxcomb !

By heaven , the wonder of a mortal eye !

By earth , she is but corporal ; there you lie .

Her amber hairs for foul have amber quoted .

An amber-colour'd raven was well noted .

As upright as the cedar .

Stoop , I say ;
Her shoulder is with child .

As fair as day .

Ay , as some days ; but then no sun must shine .

O ! that I had my wish .

And I had mine !

And I mine too , good Lord !

Amen , so I had mine . Is not that a good word ?

I would forget her ; but a fever she 
Reigns in my blood , and will remember'd be .

A fever in your blood ! why , then incision 
Would let her out in saucers : sweet misprision !

Once more I'll read the ode that I have writ .

Once more I'll mark how love can vary wit .


On a day , alack the day !
Love , whose month is ever May ,
Spied a blossom passing fair 
Playing in the wanton air :
Through the velvet leaves the wind ,
All unseen , 'gan passage find ;
That the lover , sick to death ,
Wish'd himself the heaven's breath .
Air , quoth he , thy cheeks may blow ;
Air , would I might triumph so !
But alack ! my hand is sworn 
Ne'er to pluck thee from thy thorn :
Vow , alack ! for youth unmeet ,
Youth so apt to pluck a sweet .
Do not call it sin in me ,
That I am forsworn for thee ;
Thou for whom e'en Jove would swear 
Juno but an Ethiop were ;
And deny himself for Jove ,
Turning mortal for thy love .

This will I send , and something else more plain ,
That shall express my true love's fasting pain .
O ! would the King , Berowne , and Longaville 
Were lovers too . Ill , to example ill ,
Would from my forehead wipe a perjur'd note ;
For none offend where all alike do dote .

Dumaine , thy love is far from charity ,
That in love's grief desir'st society :
You may look pale , but I should blush , I know ,
To be o'erheard and taken napping so .

Come , sir , you blush : as his your case is such ;
You chide at him , offending twice as much :
You do not love Maria ; Longaville 
Did never sonnet for her sake compile ,
Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart 
His loving bosom to keep down his heart .
I have been closely shrouded in this bush ,
And mark'd you both , and for you both did blush .
I heard your guilty rimes , observ'd your fashion ,
Saw sighs reek from you , noted well your passion :
Ay me ! says one ; O Jove ! the other cries ;
One , her hairs were gold , crystal the other's eyes :


You would for paradise break faith and troth ;


And Jove , for your love , would infringe an oath .
What will Berowne say , when that he shall hear 
A faith infringed , which such zeal did swear ?
How will he scorn ! how will he spend his wit !
How will he triumph , leap and laugh at it !
For all the wealth that ever I did see ,
I would not have him know so much by me .

Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy .

Ah ! good my liege , I pray thee , pardon me :
Good heart ! what grace hast thou , thus to reprove 
These worms for loving , that art most in love ?
Your eyes do make no coaches ; in your tears 
There is no certain princess that appears :
You'll not be perjur'd , 'tis a hateful thing :
Tush ! none but minstrels like of sonneting .
But are you not asham'd ? nay , are you not ,
All three of you , to be thus much o'ershot ?
You found his mote ; the king your mote did see ;
But I a beam do find in each of three .
O ! what a scene of foolery have I seen ,
Of sighs , of groans , of sorrow , and of teen ;
O me ! with what strict patience have I sat ,
To see a king transformed to a gnat ;
To see great Hercules whipping a gig ,
And profound Solomon to tune a jig ,
And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys ,
And critic Timon laugh at idle toys !
Where lies thy grief ? O ! tell me , good Dumaine ,
And , gentle Longaville , where lies thy pain ?
And where my liege's ? all about the breast :
A caudle , ho !

Too bitter is thy jest .
Are we betray'd thus to thy over-view ?

Not you to me , but I betray'd by you :
I , that am honest ; I , that hold it sin 
To break the vow I am engaged in ;
I am betray'd , by keeping company 
With men like men , men of inconstancy .
When shall you see me write a thing in rime ?
Or groan for Joan ? or spend a minute's time 
In pruning me ? When shall you hear that I 
Will praise a hand , a foot , a face , an eye ,
A gait , a state , a brow , a breast , a waist , leg , a limb ?

Soft ! Whither away so fast ? true man or a thief that gallops so ?

I post from love ; good lover , let me go .


God bless the king !

What present hast thou there ?

Some certain treason .

What makes treason here ?

Nay , it makes nothing , sir .

If it mar nothing neither ,
The treason and you go in peace away together .

I beseech your Grace , let this letter be read :
Our parson misdoubts it ; 'twas treason , he said .

Berowne , read it over 

There hadst thou it ?

Of Costard .

Where hadst thou it ?

Of Dun Adramadio , Dun Adramadio .


How now ! what is in you ? why dost thou tear it ?

A toy , my liege , a toy : your Grace needs not fear it .

It did move him to passion , and therefore let's hear it .

It is Berowne's writing , and here is his name .

Ah , you whoreson logger-head , you were born to do me shame .
Guilty , my lord , guilty ; I confess , I confess .

What ?

That you three fools lack'd me fool to make up the mess ;
He , he , and you , and you my liege , and I ,
Are pick-purses in love , and we deserve to die .
O ! dismiss this audience , and I shall tell you more .

Now the number is even .

True , true ; we are four .
Will these turtles be gone ?

Hence , sirs ; away !

Walk aside the true folk , and let the traitors stay .


Sweet lords , sweet lovers , O ! let us embrace .
As true we are as flesh and blood can be :
The sea will ebb and flow , heaven show his face ;
Young blood doth not obey an old decree :
We cannot cross the cause why we were born ;
Therefore , of all hands must we be forsworn .

What ! did these rent lines show some love of thine ?

'Did they ,' quoth you ? Who sees the heavenly Rosaline ,
That , like a rude and savage man of Inde ,
At the first opening of the gorgeous east ,
Bows not his vassal head , and , strucken blind ,
Kisses the base ground with obedient breast ?
What peremptory eagle-sighted eye 
Dares look upon the heaven of her brow ,
That is not blinded by her majesty ?

What zeal , what fury hath inspir'd thee now ?
My love , her mistress , is a gracious moon ;
She , an attending star , scarce seen a light .

My eyes are then no eyes , nor I Berowne :
O ! but for my love , day would turn to night .
Of all complexions the cull'd sovereignty 
Do meet , as at a fair , in her fair cheek ;
Where several worthies make one dignity ,
Where nothing wants that want itself doth seek .
Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues ,
Fie , painted rhetoric ! O ! she needs it not :
To things of sale a seller's praise belongs ;
She passes praise ; then praise too short doth blot .
A wither'd hermit , five-score winters worn ,
Might shake off fifty , looking in her eye :
Beauty doth varnish age , as if new-born ,
And gives the crutch the cradle's infancy .
O ! 'tis the sun that maketh all things shine .

By heaven , thy love is black as ebony .

Is ebony like her ? O wood divine !
A wife of such wood were felicity .
O ! who can give an oath ? where is a book ?
That I may swear beauty doth beauty lack ,
If that she learn not of her eye to look :
No face is fair that is not full so black .

O paradox ! Black is the badge of hell ,
The hue of dungeons and the scowl of night ;
And beauty's crest becomes the heavens well .

Devils soonest tempt , resembling spirits of light .
O ! if in black my lady's brows be deck'd ,
It mourns that painting and usurping hair 
Should ravish doters with a false aspect ;
And therefore is she born to make black fair .
Her favour turns the fashion of the days ,
For native blood is counted painting now :
And therefore red , that would avoid dispraise ,
Paints itself black , to imitate her brow .

To look like her are chimney-sweepers black .

And since her time are colliers counted bright .

And Ethiops of their sweet complexion crack .

Dark needs no candles now , for dark is light .

Your mistresses dare never come in rain ,
For fear their colours should be wash'd away .

'Twere good yours did ; for , sir , to tell you plain ,
I'll find a fairer face not wash'd to-day .

I'll prove her fair , or talk till doomsday here .

No devil will fright thee then so much as she .

I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear .

Look , here's thy love :

my foot and her face see .

O ! if the streets were paved with thine eyes ,
Her feet were much too dainty for such tread .

O vile ! then , as she goes , what upward lies 
The street should see as she walk'd over head .

But what of this ? Are we not all in love ?

Nothing so sure ; and thereby all forsworn .

Then leave this chat ; and good Berowne , now prove 
Our loving lawful , and our faith not torn .

Ay , marry , there ; some flattery for this evil .

O ! some authority how to proceed ;
Some tricks , some quillets , how to cheat the devil .

Some salve for perjury .

O , 'tis more than need .
Have at you , then , affection's men-at-arms :
Consider what you first did swear unto ,
To fast , to study , and to see no woman ;
Flat treason 'gainst the kingly state of youth .
Say , can you fast ? your stomachs are too young ,
And abstinence engenders maladies .
And where that you have vow'd to study , lords ,
In that each of you hath forsworn his book ,
Can you still dream and pore and thereon look ?
For when would you , my lord , or you , or you ,
Have found the ground of study's excellence 
Without the beauty of a woman's face ?
From women's eyes this doctrine I derive :
They are the ground , the books , the academes ,
From whence doth spring the true Promethean fire .
Why , universal plodding poisons up 
The nimble spirits in the arteries ,
As motion and long-during action tires 
The sinewy vigour of the traveller .
Now , for not looking on a woman's face ,
You have in that forsworn the use of eyes ,
And study too , the causer of your vow ;
For where is any author in the world 
Teaches such beauty as a woman's eye ?
Learning is but an adjunct to ourself ,
And where we are our learning likewise is :
Then when ourselves we see in ladies' eyes ,
Do we not likewise see our learning there ?
O ! we have made a vow to study , lords ,
And in that vow we have forsworn our books :
For when would you , my liege , or you , or you ,
In leaden contemplation have found out 
Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes 
Of beauty's tutors have enrich'd you with ?
Other slow arts entirely keep the brain ,
And therefore , finding barren practisers ,
Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil ;
But love , first learned in a lady's eyes ,
Lives not alone immured in the brain ,
But , with the motion of all elements ,
Courses as swift as thought in every power ,
And gives to every power a double power ,
Above their functions and their offices .
It adds a precious seeing to the eye ;
A lover's eyes will gaze an eagle blind ;
A lover's ear will hear the lowest sound ,
When the suspicious head of theft is stopp'd :
Love's feeling is more soft and sensible 
Than are the tender horns of cockled snails :
Love's tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste .
For valour , is not Love a Hercules ,
Still climbing trees in the Hesperides ?
Subtle as Sphinx ; as sweet and musical 
As bright Apollo's lute , strung with his hair ;
And when Love speaks , the voice of all the gods 
Makes heaven drowsy with the harmony .
Never durst poet touch a pen to write 
Until his ink were temper'd with Love's sighs ;
O ! then his lines would ravish savage ears ,
And plant in tyrants mild humility .
From women's eyes this doctrine I derive :
They sparkle still the right Promethean fire ;
They are the books , the arts , the academes ,
That show , contain , and nourish all the world ;
Else none at all in aught proves excellent .
Then fools you were these women to forswear ,
Or , keeping what is sworn , you will prove fools .
For wisdom's sake , a word that all men love ,
Or for love's sake , a word that loves all men ,
Or for men's sake , the authors of these women ;
Or women's sake , by whom we men are men ,
Let us once lose our oaths to find ourselves ,
Or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths .
It is religion to be thus forsworn ;
For charity itself fulfils the law ;
And who can sever love from charity ?

Saint Cupid , then ! and , soldiers , to the field !

Advance your standards , and upon them , lords !
Pell-mell , down with them ! but be first advis'd ,
In conflict that you get the sun of them .

Now to plain-dealing ; lay these glozes by ;
Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France ?

And win them too : therefore let us devise 
Some entertainment for them in their tents .

First , from the park let us conduct them thither ;
Then homeward every man attach the hand 
Of his fair mistress : in the afternoon 
We will with some strange pastime solace them ,
Such as the shortness of the time can shape ;
For revels , dances , masks , and merry hours ,
Forerun fair Love , strewing her way with flowers .

Away , away ! no time shall be omitted ,
That will betime , and may by us be fitted .

Allons ! allons ! Sow'd cockle reap'd no corn ;
And justice always whirls in equal measure :
Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn ;
If so , our copper buys no better treasure .

Satis quod sufficit .

I praise God for you , sir : your reasons at dinner have been sharp and sententious ; pleasant without scurrility , witty without affection , audacious without impudency , learned without opinion , and strange without heresy . I did converse this quondam day with a companion of the king's , who is intituled , nominated , or called , Don Adriano de Armado .

Novi hominem tanquam te : his humour is lofty , his discourse peremptory , his tongue field , his eye ambitious , his gait majestical , and his general behaviour vain , ridiculous , and thrasonical . He is too picked , too spruce , too affected , too odd , as it were , too peregrinate , as I may call it .

A most singular and choice epithet .


He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer than the staple of his argument . I abhor such fanatical phantasimes , such insociable and point-devise companions ; such rackers of orthography , as to speak dout , fine , when he should say , doubt ; det , when he should pronounce , debt ,d , e , b , t , not d , e , t : he clepeth a calf , cauf ; half , hauf ; neighbour vocatur nebour , neigh abbreviated ne . This is abhominable , which he would call abominable ,it insinuateth me of insanie : anne intelligis , domine ? To make frantic , lunatic .

Laus Deo bone intelligo .

Bone ? bone , for bene : Priscian a little scratched ; 'twill serve .


Videsne quis venit ?

Video , et gaudeo .

Chirrah !

Quare Chirrah , not sirrah ?

Men of peace , well encountered .

Most military sir , salutation .

They have been at a great feast of languages , and stolen the scraps .

O ! they have lived long on the almsbasket of words . I marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word ; for thou art not so long by the head as honorificabilitudinitatibus : thou art easier swallowed than a flap-dragon .

Peace ! the peal begins .

Monsieur , are you not lettered ?

Yes , yes ; he teaches boys the hornbook . What is a , b , spelt backward , with the horn on his head ?

Ba , pueritia , with a horn added .

Ba ! most silly sheep with a horn . You hear his learning .

Quis , quis , thou consonant ?

The third of the five vowels , if you repeat them ; or the fifth , if I .

I will repeat them ,a , e , i ,

The sheep ; the other two concludes it ,o , u .

Now , by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum , a sweet touch , a quick venew of wit ! snip , snap , quick and home ! it rejoiceth my intellect : true wit !

Offered by a child to an old man ; which is wit-old .

What is the figure ? what is the figure ?

Horns .

Thou disputest like an infant ; go , whip thy gig .

Lend me your horn to make one , and I will whip about your infamy circum circa . A gig of a cuckold's horn .

An I had but one penny in the world , thou shouldst have it to buy gingerbread . Hold , there is the very remuneration I had of thy master , thou halfpenny purse of wit , thou pigeon-egg of discretion . O ! an the heavens were so pleased that thou wert but my bastard , what a joyful father wouldst thou make me . Go to ; thou hast it ad dunghill , at the fingers' ends , as they say .

O ! I smell false Latin ; dunghill for unguem .

Arts-man , pr ambula : we will be singled from the barbarous . Do you not educate youth at the charge-house on the top of the mountain ?

Or mons , the hill .

At your sweet pleasure , for the mountain .

I do , sans question .

Sir , it is the king's most sweet pleasure and affection to congratulate the princess at her pavilion in the posteriors of this day , which the rude multitude call the afternoon .

The posterior of the day , most generous sir , is liable , congruent , and measurable for the afternoon : the word is well culled , chose , sweet and apt , I do assure you , sir ; I do assure .

Sir , the king is a noble gentleman , and my familiar , I do assure ye , very good friend . For what is inward between us , let it pass : I do beseech thee , remember thy curtsy ; I beseech thee , apparel thy head : and among other importunate and most serious designs , and of great import indeed , too , but let that pass : for I must tell thee , it will please his Grace , by the world , sometime to lean upon my poor shoulder , and with his royal finger , thus dally with my excrement , with my mustachio : but , sweet heart , let that pass . By the world , I recount no fable : some certain special honours it pleaseth his greatness to impart to Armado , a soldier , a man of travel , that hath seen the world : but let that pass . The very all of all is , but , sweet heart , I do implore secrecy , that the king would have me present the princess , sweet chuck , with some delightful ostentation , or show , or pageant , or antick , or fire-work . Now , understanding that the curate and your sweet self are good at such eruptions and sudden breaking out of mirth , as it were , I have acquainted you withal , to the end to crave your assistance .

Sir , you shall present before her the Nine Worthies . Sir Nathaniel , as concerning some entertainment of time , some show in the posterior of this day , to be rendered by our assistance , at the king's command , and this most gallant , illustrate , and learned gentleman , before the princess ; I say , none so fit as to present the Nine Worthies .

Where will you find men worthy enough to present them ?

Joshua , yourself ; myself , or this gallant gentleman , Judas Maccab us ; this swain , because of his great limb , or joint , shall pass Pompey the Great ; the page , Hercules ,

Pardon , sir ; error : he is not quantity enough for that Worthy's thumb : he is not so big as the end of his club .

Shall I have audience ? he shall present Hercules in minority : his enter and exit shall be strangling a snake ; and I will have an apology for that purpose .

An excellent device ! so , if any of the audience hiss , you may cry , 'Well done , Hercules ! now thou crushest the snake !' that is the way to make an offence gracious , though few have the grace to do it .

For the rest of the Worthies ?

I will play three myself .

Thrice-worthy gentleman !

Shall I tell you a thing ?

We attend .

We will have , if this fadge not , an antick . I beseech you , follow .

Via , goodman Dull ! thou hast spoken no word all this while .

Nor understood none neither , sir .

Allons ! we will employ thee .

I'll make one in a dance , or so ; or I will play the tabor to the Worthies , and let them dance the hay .

Most dull , honest Dull , to our sport , away !


Sweet hearts , we shall be rich ere we depart ,
If fairings come thus plentifully in : lady wall'd about with diamonds !
Look you what I have from the loving king .

Madam , came nothing else along with that ?

Nothing but this ! yes , as much love in rime 
As would be cramm'd up in a sheet of paper ,
Writ o' both sides the leaf , margent and all ,
That he was fain to seal on Cupid's name .

That was the way to make his godhead wax ;
For he hath been five thousand years a boy .

Ay , and a shrewd unhappy gallows too .

You'll ne'er be friends with him : a' kill'd your sister .

He made her melancholy , sad , and heavy ;
And so she died : had she been light , like you ,
Of such a merry , nimble , stirring spirit ,
She might ha' been a grandam ere she died ;
And so may you , for a light heart lives long .

What's your dark meaning , mouse , of this light word ?

A light condition in a beauty dark .

We need more light to find your meaning out .

You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff ;
Therefore , I'll darkly end the argument .

Look , what you do , you do it still i' the dark .

So do not you , for you are a light wench .

Indeed I weigh not you , and therefore light .

You weigh me not . O ! that's you care not for me .

Great reason ; for , 'past cure is still past care .' 

Well bandied both ; a set of wit well play'd .
But Rosaline , you have a favour too :
Who sent it ? and what is it ?

I would you knew :
An if my face were but as fair as yours ,
My favour were as great ; be witness this .
Nay , I have verses too , I thank Berowne :
The numbers true ; and , were the numb'ring too ,
I were the fairest goddess on the ground :
I am compar'd to twenty thousand fairs .
O ! he hath drawn my picture in his letter .

Anything like ?

Much in the letters , nothing in the praise .

Beauteous as ink ; a good conclusion .

Fair as a text B in a copy-book .

'Ware pencils ! how ? let me not die your debtor .
My red dominical , my golden letter :
O , that your face were not so full of O's !

A pox of that jest ! and beshrew all shrows !

But what was sent to you from fair Dumaine ?

Madam , this glove .

Did he not send you twain ?

Yes , madam ; and moreover ,
Some thousand verses of a faithful lover :
A huge translation of hypocrisy ,
Vilely compil'd , profound simplicity .

This , and these pearls to me sent Longaville :
The letter is too long by half a mile .

I think no less . Dost thou not wish in heart 
The chain were longer and the letter short ?

Ay , or I would these hands might never part .

We are wise girls to mock our lovers so .

They are worse fools to purchase mocking so .
That same Berowne I'll torture ere I go .
O that I knew he were but in by the week !
How I would make him fawn , and beg , and seek ,
And wait the season , and observe the times ,
And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rimes ,
And shape his service wholly to my hests ,
And make him proud to make me proud that jests !
So perttaunt-like would I o'ersway his state 
That he should be my fool , and I his fate .

None are so surely caught , when they are catch'd ,
As wit turn'd fool : folly , in wisdom hatch'd ,
Hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school 
And wit's own grace to grace a learned fool .

The blood of youth burns not with such excess 
As gravity's revolt to wantonness .

Folly in fools bears not so strong a note 
As foolery in the wise , when wit doth dote ;
Since all the power thereof it doth apply 
To prove , by wit , worth in simplicity .


Here comes Boyet , and mirth is in his face .

O ! I am stabb'd with laughter . Where's her Grace ?

Thy news , Boyet ?

Prepare , madam , prepare !
Arm , wenches , arm ! encounters mounted are 
Against your peace : Love doth approach disguis'd ,
Armed in arguments ; you'll be surpris'd :
Muster your wits ; stand in your own defence ;
Or hide your heads like cowards , and fly hence .

Saint Denis to Saint Cupid ! What are they 
That charge their breath against us ? say , scout , say .

Under the cool shade of a sycamore 
I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour ,
When , lo ! to interrupt my purpos'd rest ,
Toward that shade I might behold addrest 
The king and his companions : warily 
I stole into a neighbour thicket by ,
And overheard what you shall overhear ;
That , by and by , disguis'd they will be here .
Their herald is a pretty knavish page ,
That well by heart hath conn'd his embassage :
Action and accent did they teach him there ;
'Thus must thou speak , and thus thy body bear .' 
And ever and anon they made a doubt 
Presence majestical would put him out ;
'For ,' quoth the king , 'an angel shalt thou see ;
Yet fear not thou , but speak audaciously .' 
The boy replied , 'An angel is not evil ;
I should have fear'd her had she been a devil .' 
With that all laugh'd and clapp'd him on the shoulder ,
Making the bold wag by their praises bolder .
One rubb'd his elbow thus , and fleer'd , and swore 
A better speech was never spoke before ;
Another , with his finger and his thumb ,
Cry'd 'Via ! we will do't , come what will come ;' 
The third he caper'd and cried , 'All goes well ;' 
The fourth turn'd on the toe , and down he fell .
With that , they all did tumble on the ground ,
With such a zealous laughter , so profound ,
That in this spleen ridiculous appears ,
To check their folly , passion's solemn tears .

But what , but what , come they to visit us ?

They do , they do ; and are apparell'd thus ,
Like Muscovites or Russians , as I guess .
Their purpose is to parle , to court and dance ;
And every one his love-feat will advance 
Unto his several mistress , which they'll know 
By favours several which they did bestow .

And will they so ? the gallants shall be task'd :
For , ladies , we will every one be mask'd ,
And not a man of them shall have the grace ,
Despite of suit , to see a lady's face .
Hold , Rosaline , this favour thou shalt wear ,
And then the king will court thee for his dear :
Hold , take thou this , my sweet , and give me thine ,
So shall Berowne take me for Rosaline ,
And change you favours too ; so shall your loves 
Woo contrary , deceiv'd by these removes .

Come on , then ; wear the favours most in sight .

But in this changing what is your intent ?

The effect of my intent is , to cross theirs :
They do it but in mocking merriment ;
And mock for mock is only my intent .
Their several counsels they unbosom shall 
To loves mistook and so be mock'd withal 
Upon the next occasion that we meet ,
With visages display'd , to talk and greet .

But shall we dance , if they desire us to't ?

No , to the death , we will not move a foot :
Nor to their penn'd speech render we no grace ;
But while 'tis spoke each turn away her face .

Why , that contempt will kill the speaker's heart ,
And quite divorce his memory from his part .

Therefore I do it ; and I make no doubt ,
The rest will ne'er come in , if he be out .
There's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown ,
To make theirs ours and ours none but our own :
So shall we stay , mocking intended game ,
And they , well mock'd , depart away with shame .


The trumpet sounds : be mask'd ; the maskers come .


All hail , the richest beauties on the earth !

Beauties no richer than rich taffeta .

A holy parcel of the fairest dames ,

That ever turn'd their backs to mortal views !

'Their eyes ,' villain , 'their eyes .' 

That ever turn'd their eyes to mortal views !
Out 

True ; 'out ,' indeed .

'Out of your favours , heavenly spirits , vouchsafe 
Not to behold' 

'Once to behold ,' rogue .

'Once to behold with your sun-beamed eyes ,
with your sun-beamed eyes' 

They will not answer to that epithet ;
You were best call it 'daughter-beamed eyes .' 

They do not mark me , and that brings me out .

Is this your perfectness ? be gone , you rogue !


What would these strangers ? know their minds , Boyet :
If they do speak our language , 'tis our will 
That some plain man recount their purposes :
Know what they would .

What would you with the princess ?

Nothing but peace and gentle visitation .

What would they , say they ?

Nothing but peace and gentle visitation .

Why , that they have ; and bid them so be gone .

She says , you have it , and you may be gone .

Say to her , we have measur'd many miles ,
To tread a measure with her on this grass .

They say , that they have measur'd many a mile ,
To tread a measure with you on this grass .

It is not so . Ask them how many inches 
Is in one mile : if they have measur'd many ,
The measure then of one is easily told .

If to come hither you have measur'd miles ,
And many miles , the princess bids you tell 
How many inches do fill up one mile .

Tell her we measure them by weary steps .

She hears herself .

How many weary steps ,
Of many weary miles you have o'ergone ,
Are number'd in the travel of one mile ?

We number nothing that we spend for you :
Our duty is so rich , so infinite ,
That we may do it still without accompt .
Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face ,
That we , like savages , may worship it .

My face is but a moon , and clouded too .

Blessed are clouds , to do as such clouds do !
Vouchsafe , bright moon , and these thy stars , to shine ,
Those clouds remov'd , upon our wat'ry eyne .

O vain petitioner ! beg a greater matter ;
Thou now request'st but moonshine in the water .

Then , in our measure but vouchsafe one change .
Thou bid'st me beg ; this begging is not strange .

Play , music , then ! Nay , you must do it soon .

Not yet ! no dance ! thus change I like the moon .

Will you not dance ? How come you thus estrang'd ?

You took the moon at full , but now she's chang'd .

Yet still she is the moon , and I the man .
The music plays ; vouchsafe some motion to it .

Our ears vouchsafe it .

But your legs should do it .

Since you are strangers , and come here by chance ,
We'll not be nice : take hands : we will not dance .

Why take we hands then ?

Only to part friends .
Curtsy , sweet hearts ; and so the measure ends .

More measure of this measure : be not nice .

We can afford no more at such a price .

Prize you yourselves ? what buys your company ?

Your absence only .

That can never be .

Then cannot we be bought : and so , adieu ;
Twice to your visor , and half once to you !

If you deny to dance , let's hold more chat .

In private , then .

I am best pleas'd with that .


White-handed mistress , one sweet word with thee .

Honey , and milk , and sugar ; there are three .

Nay then , two treys , an if you grow so nice ,
Metheglin , wort , and malmsey : well run , dice !
There's half a dozen sweets .

Seventh sweet , adieu :
Since you can cog , I'll play no more with you .

One word in secret .

Let it not be sweet .

Thou griev'st my gall .

Gall ! bitter .

Therefore meet .


Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word ?

Name it .

Fair lady ,

Say you so ? Fair lord ,
Take that for your fair lady .

Please it you ,
As much in private , and I'll bid adieu .


What ! was your visor made without a tongue ?

I know the reason , lady , why you ask .

O ! for your reason ; quickly , sir ; I long .

You have a double tongue within your mask ,
And would afford my speechless visor half .

'Veal ,' quoth the Dutchman . Is not 'veal' a calf ?

A calf , fair lady !

No , a fair lord calf .

Let's part the word .

No , I'll not be your half :
Take all , and wean it : it may prove an ox .

Look , how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks .
Will you give horns , chaste lady ? do not so .

Then die a calf , before your horns do grow .

One word in private with you , ere I die .

Bleat softly then ; the butcher hears you cry .


The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen 
As is the razor's edge invisible ,
Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen ,
Above the sense of sense ; so sensible 
Seemeth their conference ; their conceits have wings 
Fleeter than arrows , bullets , wind , thought , swifter things .

Not one word more , my maids : break off , break off .

By heaven , all dry-beaten with pure scoff !

Farewell , mad wenches : you have simple wits .

Twenty adieus , my frozen Muscovits .

Are these the breed of wits so wonder'd at ?

Tapers they are , with your sweet breaths puff'd out .

Well-liking wits they have ; gross , gross ; fat , fat .

O poverty in wit , kingly-poor flout !
Will they not , think you , hang themselves to-night ?
Or ever , but in visors , show their faces ?
This pert Berowne was out of countenance quite .

O ! they were all in lamentable cases .
The king was weeping-ripe for a good word .

Berowne did swear himself out of all suit .

Dumaine was at my service , and his sword :
'No point ,' quoth I : my servant straight was mute .

Lord Longaville said , I came o'er his heart ;
And trow you what he call'd me ?

Qualm , perhaps .

Yes , in good faith .

Go , sickness as thou art !

Well , better wits have worn plain statutecaps .
But will you hear ? the king is my love sworn .

And quick Berowne hath plighted faith to me .

And Longaville was for my service born .

Dumaine is mine , as sure as bark on tree .

Madam , and pretty mistresses , give ear :
Immediately they will again be here 
In their own shapes ; for it can never be 
They will digest this harsh indignity .

Will they return ?

They will , they will , God knows ;
And leap for joy , though they are lame with blows :
Therefore change favours ; and , when they repair ,
Blow like sweet roses in this summer air .

How blow ? how blow ? speak to be understood .

Fair ladies mask'd , are roses in their bud :
Dismask'd , their damask sweet commixture shown ,
Are angels vailing clouds , or roses blown .

Avaunt perplexity ! What shall we do 
If they return in their own shapes to woo ?

Good madam , if by me you'll be advis'd ,
Let's mock them still , as well known as disguis'd .
Let us complain to them what fools were here ,
Disguis'd like Muscovites , in shapeless gear ;
And wonder what they were , and to what end 
Their shallow shows and prologue vilely penn'd ,
And their rough carriage so ridiculous ,
Should be presented at our tent to us .

Ladies , withdraw : the gallants are at hand .

Whip to your tents , as roes run over land .

Fair sir , God save you ! Where is the princess ?

Gone to her tent . Please it your majesty ,
Command me any service to her thither ?

That she vouchsafe me audience for one word .

I will ; and so will she , I know , my lord .


This fellow pecks up wit , as pigeons pease ,
And utters it again when God doth please :
He is wit's pedlar , and retails his wares 
At wakes and wassails , meetings , markets , fairs ;
And we that sell by gross , the Lord doth know ,
Have not the grace to grace it with such show .
This gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve ;
Had he been Adam , he had tempted Eve :
He can carve too , and lisp : why , this is he 
That kiss'd his hand away in courtesy ;
This is the ape of form , monsieur the nice ,
That , when he plays at tables , chides the dice 
In honourable terms : nay , he can sing 
A mean most meanly , and in ushering 
Mend him who can : the ladies call him , sweet ;
The stairs , as he treads on them , kiss his feet .
This is the flower that smiles on every one ,
To show his teeth as white as whales-bone ;
And consciences , that will not die in debt ,
Pay him the due of honey-tongu'd Boyet .

A blister on his sweet tongue , with my heart ,
That put Armado's page out of his part !


See where it comes ! Behaviour , what wert thou ,
Till this man show'd thee ? and what art thou now ?

All hail , sweet madam , and fair time of day !

'Fair ,' in 'all hail ,' is foul , as I conceive .

Construe my speeches better , if you may .

Then wish me better : I will give you leave .

We came to visit you , and purpose now 
To lead you to our court : vouchsafe it then .

This field shall hold me , and so hold your vow :
Nor God , nor I , delights in perjur'd men .

Rebuke me not for that which you provoke :
The virtue of your eye must break my oath .

You nick-name virtue ; vice you should have spoke ;
For virtue's office never breaks men's troth .
Now , by my maiden honour , yet as pure 
As the unsullied lily , I protest ,
A world of torments though I should endure ,
I would not yield to be your house's guest ;
So much I hate a breaking cause to be 
Of heavenly oaths , vow'd with integrity .

O ! you have liv'd in desolation here ,
Unseen , unvisited , much to our shame .

Not so , my lord ; it is not so , I swear ;
We have had pastime here and pleasant game .
A mess of Russians left us but of late .

How , madam ! Russians ?

Ay , in truth , my lord ;
Trim gallants , full of courtship and of state .

Madam , speak true . It is not so , my lord :
My lady , to the manner of the days ,
In courtesy gives undeserving praise .
We four , indeed , confronted were with four 
In Russian habit : here they stay'd an hour ,
And talk'd apace ; and in that hour , my lord ,
They did not bless us with one happy word .
I dare not call them fools ; but this I think ,
When they are thirsty , fools would fam have drink .

This jest is dry to me . Fair gentle sweet ,
Your wit makes wise things foolish : when we greet ,
With eyes best seeing , heaven's fiery eye ,
By light we lose light : your capacity 
Is of that nature that to your huge store 
Wise things seem foolish and rich things but poor .

This proves you wise and rich , for in my eye 

I am a fool , and full of poverty .

But that you take what doth to you belong ,
It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue .

O ! I am yours , and all that I possess .

All the fool mine ?

I cannot give you less .

Which of the visors was it that you wore ?

Where ? when ? what visor ? why demand you this ?

There , then , that visor ; that superfluous case 
That hid the worse , and show'd the better face .

We are descried : they'll mock us now downright .

Let us confess , and turn it to a jest .

Amaz'd , my lord ? Why looks your highness sad ?

Help ! hold his brows ! he'll swound .
Why look you pale ?
Sea-sick , I think , coming from Muscovy .

Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury .
Can any face of brass hold longer out ?
Here stand I , lady ; dart thy skill at me ;
Bruise me with scorn , confound me with a flout ;
Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance ;
Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit ;
And I will wish thee never more to dance ,
Nor never more in Russian habit wait .
O ! never will I trust to speeches penn'd ,
Nor to the motion of a school-boy's tongue ,
Nor never come in visor to my friend ,
Nor woo in rime , like a blind harper's song ,
Taffeta phrases , silken terms precise ,
Three-pil'd hyperboles , spruce affectation ,
Figures pedantical ; these summer flies 
Have blown me full of maggot ostentation :
I do forswear them ; and I here protest ,
By this white glove ,how white the hand ,
God knows ,
Henceforth my wooing mind shall be express'd 
In russet yeas and honest kersey noes :
And , to begin , wench ,so God help me , la !
My love to thee is sound , sans crack or flaw .

Sans 'sans ,' I pray you .

Yet I have a trick 
Of the old rage : bear with me , I am sick ;
I'll leave it by degrees . Soft ! let us see :
Write , 'Lord have mercy on us' on those three ;
They are infected , in their hearts it lies ;
They have the plague , and caught it of your eyes :
These lords are visited ; you are not free ,
For the Lord's tokens on you do I see .

No , they are free that gave these tokens to us .

Our states are forfeit : seek not to undo us .

It is not so . For how can this be true ,
That you stand forfeit , being those that sue ?

Peace ! for I will not have to do with you .

Nor shall not , if I do as I intend .

Speak for yourselves : my wit is at an end .

Teach us , sweet madam , for our rude transgression 
Some fair excuse .

The fairest is confession .
Were you not here , but even now , disguis'd ?

Madam , I was .

And were you well advis'd ?

I was , fair madam .

When you then were here ,
What did you whisper in your lady's ear ?

That more than all the world I did respect her .

When she shall challenge this , you will reject her .

Upon mine honour , no .

Peace ! peace ! forbear ;
Your oath once broke , you force not to forswear .

Despise me , when I break this oath of mine .

I will ; and therefore keep it . Rosaline ,
What did the Russian whisper in your ear ?

Madam , he swore that he did hold me dear 
As precious eyesight , and did value me 
Above this world ; adding thereto , moreover ,
That he would wed me , or else die my lover .

God give thee joy of him ! the noble lord 
Most honourably doth uphold his word .

What mean you , madam ? by my life , my troth ,
I never swore this lady such an oath .

By heaven you did ; and to confirm it plain ,
You gave me this : but take it , sir , again .

My faith and this the princess I did give :
I knew her by this jewel on her sleeve .

Pardon me , sir , this jewel did she wear ;
And Lord Berowne , I thank him , is my dear .
What , will you have me , or your pearl again ?

Neither of either ; I remit both twain .
I see the trick on't : here was a consent ,
Knowing aforehand of our merriment ,
To dash it like a Christmas comedy .
Some carry-tale , some please-man , some slight zany ,
Some mumble-news , some trencher-knight , some Dick ,
That smiles his cheek in years , and knows the trick 
To make my lady laugh when she's dispos'd ,
Told our intents before ; which once disclos'd ,
The ladies did change favours , and then we ,
Following the signs , woo'd but the sign of she .
Now , to our perjury to add more terror ,
We are again forsworn , in will and error .
Much upon this it is :

and might not you 
Forestall our sport , to make us thus untrue ?
Do not you know my lady's foot by the squire ,
And laugh upon the apple of her eye ?
And stand between her back , sir , and the fire ,
Holding a trencher , jesting merrily ?
You put our page out : go , you are allow'd ;
Die when you will , a smock shall be your shroud .
You leer upon me , do you ? there's an eye 
Wounds like a leaden sword .

Full merrily 
Hath this brave manage , this career , been run .

Lo ! he is tilting straight . Peace ! I have done .

Welcome , pure wit ! thou partest a fair fray .

O Lord , sir , they would know 
Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no .

What , are there but three ?

No , sir ; but it is vara fine ,
For every one pursents three .

And three times thrice is nine .

Not so , sir ; under correction , sir , I hope , it is not so .
You cannot beg us , sir , I can assure you , sir ; we know what we know :
I hope , sir , three times thrice , sir ,

Is not nine .

Under correction , sir , we know whereuntil it doth amount .

By Jove , I always took three threes for nine .

O Lord , sir ! it were pity you should get your living by reckoning , sir .

How much is it ?

O Lord , sir ! the parties themselves , the actors , sir , will show whereuntil it doth amount : for mine own part , I am , as they say , but to parfect one man in one poor man , Pompion the Great , sir .

Art thou one of the Worthies ?

It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompion the Great : for mine own part , I know not the degree of the Worthy , but I am to stand for him .

Go , bid them prepare .

We will turn it finely off , sir ; we will take some care .


Berowne , they will shame us ; let them not approach .

We are shame-proof , my lord ; and 'tis some policy 
To have one show worse than the king's and his company .

I say they shall not come .

Nay , my good lord , let me o'errule you now .
That sport best pleases that doth least know how ;
Where zeal strives to content , and the contents 
Die in the zeal of those which it presents ;
Their form confounded makes most form in mirth ,
When great things labouring perish in their birth .

A right description of our sport , my lord .


Anointed , I implore so much expense of thy royal sweet breath as will utter a brace of words .


Doth this man serve God ?

Why ask you ?

He speaks not like a man of God's making ,

That's all one , my fair , sweet , honey monarch ; for , I protest , the schoolmaster is exceeding fantastical ; too-too vain ; too-too vain : but we will put it , as they say , to fortuna de la guerra . I wish you the peace of mind , most royal couplement !


Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies . He presents Hector of Troy ; the swain , Pompey the Great ; the parish curate , Alexander ; Armado's page , Hercules ; the pedant , Judas Maccab us :
And if these four Worthies in their first show thrive ,
These four will change habits and present the other five .

There is five in the first show .

You are deceived , 'tis not so .

The pedant , the braggart , the hedgepriest , the fool , and the boy :
Abate throw at novum , and the whole world again 
Cannot pick out five such , take each one in his vein .

The ship is under sail , and here she comes amain .


I Pompey am ,

You lie , you are not he .

I Pompey am ,

With libbard's head on knee .

Well said , old mocker : I must needs be friends with thee .

I Pompey am , Pompey surnam'd the Big ,

'The Great .' 

It is 'Great ,' sir ; Pompey surnam'd the Great ;
That oft in field , with targe and shield , did make my foe to sweat :
And travelling along this coast , I here am come by chance ,
And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of France .
If your ladyship would say , 'Thanks , Pompey ,' I had done .

Great thanks , great Pompey .

'Tis not so much worth ; but I hope I was perfect . I made a little fault in 'Great .' 

My hat to a halfpenny , Pompey proves the best Worthy .


When in the world I liv'd , I was the world's commander ;
By east , west , north , and south , I spread my conquering might :
My scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander ,

Your nose says , no , you are not ; for it stands too right .

Your nose smells 'no ,' in this , most tender-smelling knight .

The conqueror is dismay'd . Proceed , good Alexander .

When in the world I liv'd , I was the world's commander ;

Most true ; 'tis right : you were so , Alisander .

Pompey the Great ,

Your servant , and Costard .

Take away the conqueror , take away Alisander .


There , an't shall please you : a foolish mild man ; an honest man , look you , and soon dashed ! He is a marvellous good neighbour , faith , and a very good bowler ; but , for Alisander ,alas , you see how 'tis ,a little o'erparted . But there are Worthies a-coming will speak their mind in some other sort .

Stand aside , good Pompey .


Great Hercules is presented by this imp ,
Whose club kill'd Cerberus , that three-headed canis ;
And , when he was a babe , a child , a shrimp ,
Thus did he strangle serpents in his manus .
Quoniam , he seemeth in minority ,
Ergo , I come with this apology .
Keep some state in thy exit , and vanish .

Judas I am .

A Judas !

Not Iscariot , sir .
Judas I am , ycleped Maccab us .

Judas Maccab us clipt is plain Judas .

A kissing traitor . How art thou prov'd Judas ?

Judas I am .

The more shame for you , Judas .

What mean you , sir ?

To make Judas hang himself .

Begin , sir ; you are my elder .

Well follow'd : Judas was hanged on an elder .

I will not be put out of countenance .

Because thou hast no face .

What is this ?

A cittern-head .

The head of a bodkin .

A death's face in a ring .

The face of an old Roman coin , scarce seen .

The pommel of C sar's falchion .

The carved-bone face on a flask .

Saint George's half-cheek in a brooch .

Ay , and in a brooch of lead .

Ay , and worn in the cap of a toothdrawer .
And now forward ; for we have put thee in countenance .

You have put me out of countenance .

False : we have given thee faces .

But you have outfaced them all .

An thou wert a lion , we would do so .

Therefore , as he is an ass , let him go .
And so adieu , sweet Jude ! nay , why dost thou stay ?

For the latter end of his name .

For the ass to the Jude ? give it him :Jud-as , away !

This is not generous , not gentle , not humble .

A light for Monsieur Judas ! it grows dark , he may stumble .

Alas ! poor Maccab us , how hath he been baited .


Hide thy head , Achilles : here comes Hector in arms .

Though my mocks come home by me , I will now be merry .

Hector was but a Troyan in respect of this .

But is this Hector ?

I think Hector was not so clean-timbered .

His calf is too big for Hector .

More calf , certain .

No ; he is best indued in the small .

This cannot be Hector .

He's a god or a painter ; for he makes faces .

The armipotent Mars , of lances the almighty ,
Gave Hector a gift ,

A gilt nutmeg .

A lemon .

Stuck with cloves .

No , cloven .

Peace !
The armipotent Mars , of lances the almighty , Gave Hector a gift , the heir of Ilion ;
A man so breath'd , that certain he would fight ye 
From morn till night , out of his pavilion .
I am that flower ,

That mint .

That columbine .

Sweet Lord Longaville , rein thy tongue .

I must rather give it the rein , for it runs against Hector .

Ay , and Hector's a greyhound .

The sweet war-man is dead and rotten ; sweet chucks , beat not the bones of the buried ; when he breathed , he was a man . But I will forward with my device .

Sweet royalty , bestow on me the sense of hearing .

Speak , brave Hector ; we are much delighted .

I do adore thy sweet Grace's slipper .

Loves her by the foot .

He may not by the yard .

This Hector far surmounted Hannibal ,

The party is gone ; fellow Hector , she is gone ; she is two months on her way .

What meanest thou ?

Faith , unless you play the honest Troyan , the poor wench is cast away : she's quick ; the child brags in her belly already : 'tis yours .

Dost thou infamonize me among potentates ? Thou shalt die .

Then shall Hector be whipped for Jaquenetta that is quick by him , and hanged for Pompey that is dead by him .

Most rare Pompey !

Renowned Pompey !

Greater than great , great , great , great Pompey ! Pompey the Huge !

Hector trembles .

Pompey is moved . More Ates , more Ates ! stir them on ! stir them on !

Hector will challenge him .

Ay , if a' have no more man's blood in's belly than will sup a flea .

By the north pole , I do challenge thee .

I will not fight with a pole , like a northern man : I'll slash ; I'll do it by the sword . I bepray you , let me borrow my arms again .

Room for the incensed Worthies !

I'll do it in my shirt .

Most resolute Pompey !

Master , let me take you a button-hole lower . Do you not see Pompey is uncasing for the combat ? What mean you ? you will lose your reputation .

Gentlemen and soldiers , pardon me ; I will not combat in my shirt .

You may not deny it ; Pompey hath made the challenge .

Sweet bloods , I both may and will .

What reason have you for't ?

The naked truth of it is , I have no shirt . I go woolward for penance .

True , and it was enjoined him in Rome for want of linen ; since when , I'll be sworn , he wore none but a dish-clout of Jaquenetta's , and that a' wears next his heart for a favour .


God save you , madam !

Welcome , Marcade ;
But that thou interrupt'st our merriment .

I am sorry , madam ; for the news I bring 
Is heavy in my tongue . The king your father 

Dead , for my life !

Even so : my tale is told .

Worthies , away ! The scene begins to cloud .

For my own part , I breathe free breath . I have seen the day of wrong through the little hole of discretion , and I will right myself like a soldier .


How fares your majesty ?

Boyet , prepare : I will away to-night .

Madam , not so : I do beseech you , stay .

Prepare , I say . I thank you , gracious lords ,
For all your fair endeavours ; and entreat ,
Out of a new-sad soul , that you vouchsafe 
In your rich wisdom to excuse or hide 
The liberal opposition of our spirits ,
If over-boldly we have borne ourselves 
In the converse of breath ; your gentleness 
Was guilty of it . Farewell , worthy lord !
A heavy heart bears not a nimble tongue ,
Excuse me so , coming so short of thanks 
For my great suit so easily obtain'd .

The extreme part of time extremely forms 
All causes to the purpose of his speed ,
And often , at his very loose , decides 
That which long process could not arbitrate :
And though the mourning brow of progeny 
Forbid the smiling courtesy of love 
The holy suit which fain it would convince ;
Yet , since love's argument was first on foot ,
Let not the cloud of sorrow justle it 
From what it purpos'd ; since , to wail friends lost 
Is not by much so wholesome-profitable 
As to rejoice at friends but newly found .

I understand you not : my griefs are double .

Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief ;
And by these badges understand the king .
For your fair sakes have we neglected time ,
Play'd foul play with our oaths . Your beauty , ladies ,
Hath much deform'd us , fashioning our humours 
Even to the opposed end of our intents ;
And what in us hath seem'd ridiculous ,
As love is full of unbefitting strains ;
All wanton as a child , skipping and vain ;
Form'd by the eye , and , therefore , like the eye ,
Full of stray shapes , of habits and of forms ,
Varying in subjects , as the eye doth roll 
To every varied object in his glance :
Which parti-coated presence of loose love 
Put on by us , if , in your heavenly eyes ,
Have misbecome our oaths and gravities ,
Those heavenly eyes , that look into these faults ,
Suggested us to make . Therefore , ladies ,
Our love being yours , the error that love makes 
Is likewise yours : we to ourselves prove false ,
By being once false for ever to be true 
To those that make us both ,fair ladies , you :
And even that falsehood , in itself a sin ,
Thus purifies itself and turns to grace .

We have receiv'd your letters full of love ;
Your favours , the embassadors of love ;
And , in our maiden council , rated them 
At courtship , pleasant jest , and courtesy ,
As bombast and as lining to the time .
But more devout than this in our respects 
Have we not been ; and therefore met your loves 
In their own fashion , like a merriment .

Our letters , madam , show'd much more than jest .

So did our looks .

We did not quote them so .

Now , at the latest minute of the hour ,
Grant us your loves .

A time , methinks , too short 
To make a world-without-end bargain in .
No , no , my lord , your Grace is perjur'd much ,
Full of dear guiltiness ; and therefore this :
If for my love ,as there is no such cause ,
You will do aught , this shall you do for me :
Your oath I will not trust ; but go with speed 
To some forlorn and naked hermitage ,
Remote from all the pleasures of the world ;
There stay , until the twelve celestial signs 
Have brought about their annual reckoning .
If this austere insociable life 
Change not your offer made in heat of blood ;
If frosts and fasts , hard lodging and thin weeds ,
Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love ,
But that it bear this trial and last love ;
Then , at the expiration of the year ,
Come challenge me , challenge me by these deserts ,
And , by this virgin palm now kissing thine ,
I will be thine ; and , till that instant , shut 
My woful self up in a mourning house ,
Raining the tears of lamentation 
For the remembrance of my father's death .
If this thou do deny , let our hands part ;
Neither intitled in the other's heart .

If this , or more than this , I would deny ,
To flatter up these powers of mine with rest ,
The sudden hand of death close up mine eye !
Hence ever then my heart is in thy breast .

And what to me , my love ? and what to me ?

You must be purged too , your sins are rack'd :
You are attaint with faults and perjury ;
Therefore , if you my favour mean to get ,
A twelvemonth shall you spend , and never rest ,
But seek the weary beds of people sick .

But what to me , my love ? but what to me ?

A wife ! A beard , fair health , and honesty ;
With three-fold love I wish you all these three .

O ! shall I say , I thank you , gentle wife ?

Not so , my lord . A twelvemonth and a day 
I'll mark no words that smooth-fac'd wooers say :
Come when the king doth to my lady come ;
Then , if I have much love , I'll give you some .

I'll serve thee true and faithfully till then .

Yet swear not , lest you be forsworn again .

What says Maria ?

At the twelvemonth's end 
I'll change my black gown for a faithful friend .

I'll stay with patience ; but the time is long .

The liker you ; few taller are so young .

Studies my lady ? mistress , look on me .
Behold the window of my heart , mine eye ,
What humble suit attends thy answer there ;
Impose some service on me for thy love .

Oft have I heard of you , my Lord Berowne ,
Before I saw you , and the world's large tongue 
Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks ;
Full of comparisons and wounding flouts ,
Which you on all estates will execute 
That lie within the mercy of your wit :
To weed this wormwood from your fruitful brain ,
And therewithal to win me , if you please ,
Without the which I am not to be won ,
You shall this twelvemonth term , from day to day ,
Visit the speechless sick , and still converse 
With groaning wretches ; and your task shall be ,
With all the fierce endeavour of your wit 
To enforce the pained impotent to smile .

To move wild laughter in the throat of death ?
It cannot be ; it is impossible :
Mirth cannot move a soul in agony .

Why , that's the way to choke a gibing spirit ,
Whose influence is begot of that loose grace 
Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools .
A jest's prosperity lics in the ear 
Of him that hears it , never in the tongue 
Of him that makes it : then , if sickly ears ,
Deaf'd with the clamours of their own dear groans ,
Will hear your idle scorns , continue them ,
And I will have you and that fault withal ;
But if they will not , throw away that spirit ,
And I shall find you empty of that fault ,
Right joyful of your reformation .

A twelvemonth ! well , befall what will befall ,
I'll jest a twelvemonth in a hospital .

Ay , sweet my lord ; and so I take my leave .

No , madam ; we will bring you on your way .

Our wooing doth not end like an old play ;
Jack hath not Jill ; these ladies' courtesy 
Might well have made our sport a comedy .

Come , sir , it wants a twelvemonth and a day ,
And then 'twill end .

That's too long for a play .


Sweet majesty , vouchsafe me ,

Was not that Hector ?

The worthy knight of Troy .

I will kiss thy royal finger , and take leave . I am a votary ; I have vowed to Jaquenetta to hold the plough for her sweet love three years . But , most esteemed greatness , will you hear the dialogue that the two learned men have compiled in praise of the owl and the cuckoo ? it should have followed in the end of our show .

Call them forth quickly ; we will do so .

Holla ! approach .


This side is Hiems , Winter ; this Ver , the Spring ; the one maintained by the owl , the other by the cuckoo . Ver , begin .

SPRING .


I 

When daisies pied and violets blue 
And lady-smocks all silver-white 
And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue 
Do paint the meadows with delight ,
The cuckoo then , on every tree ,
Mocks married men ; for thus sings he ,
Cuckoo ,
Cuckoo , cuckoo : O , word of fear ,
Unpleasing to a married ear !

II .

When shepherds pipe on oaten straws ,
And merry larks are ploughmen's clocks ,
When turtles tread , and rooks , and daws ,
And maidens bleach their summer smocks ,
The cuckoo then , on every tree ,
Mocks married men ; for thus sings he ,
Cuckoo ;
Cuckoo , cuckoo : O , word of fear ,
Unpleasing to a married ear !

WINTER .


III .

When icicles hang by the wall ,
And Dick the shepherd blows his nail ,
And Tom bears logs into the hall ,
And milk comes frozen home in pail ,
When blood is nipp'd , and ways be foul ,
Then nightly sings the staring owl ,
Tu-who ;
Tu-whit , tu-who a merry note ,
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot .

IV 

When all aloud the wind doth blow ,
And coughing drowns the parson's saw ,
And birds sit brooding in the snow ,
And Marian's nose looks red and raw ,
When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl ,
Then nightly sings the staring owl ,
Tu-who ;
Tu-whit , tu-who a merry note ,
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot .


The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of Apollo . You , that way : we , this way .

MEASURE FOR MEASURE

Escalus .

My lord ?

Of government the properties to unfold ,
Would seem in me to affect speech and discourse ,
Since I am put to know that your own science 
Exceeds , in that , the lists of all advice 
My strength can give you : then no more remains ,
But that , to your sufficiency , as your worth is able ,
And let them work . The nature of our people ,
Our city's institutions , and the terms 
For common justice , you're as pregnant in ,
As art and practice hath enriched any 
That we remember . There is our commission ,

From which we would not have you warp . Call hither ,
I say , bid come before us Angelo .

What figure of us think you he will bear ?
For you must know , we have with special soul 
Elected him our absence to supply ,
Lent him our terror , drest him with our love ,
And given his deputation all the organs 
Of our own power : what think you of it ?

If any in Vienna be of worth 
To undergo such ample grace and honour ,
It is Lord Angelo .

Look where he comes .


Always obedient to your Grace's will ,
I come to know your pleasure .

Angelo ,
There is a kind of character in thy life ,
That , to th' observer doth thy history 
Fully unfold . Thyself and thy belongings 
Are not thine own so proper , as to waste 
Thyself upon thy virtues , they on thee .
Heaven doth with us as we with torches do ,
Not light them for themselves ; for if our virtues 
Did not go forth of us , 'twere all alike 
As if we had them not . Spirits are not finely touch'd 
But to fine issues , nor Nature never lends 
The smallest scruple of her excellence ,
But , like a thrifty goddess , she determines 
Herself the glory of a creditor ,
Both thanks and use . But I do bend my speech 
To one that can my part in him advertise ;
Hold , therefore , Angelo :

In our remove be thou at full ourself ;
Mortality and mercy in Vienna 
Live in thy tongue and heart . Old Escalus ,
Though first in question , is thy secondary .
Take thy commission .


Now , good my lord ,
Let there be some more test made of my metal ,
Before so noble and so great a figure 
Be stamp'd upon it .

No more evasion :
We have with a leaven'd and prepared choice 
Proceeded to you ; therefore take your honours .
Our haste from hence is of so quick condition 
That it prefers itself , and leaves unquestion'd 
Matters of needful value . We shall write to you ,
As time and our concernings shall importune ,
How it goes with us ; and do look to know 
What doth befall you here . So , fare you well :
To the hopeful execution do I leave you 
Of your commissions .

Yet , give leave , my lord ,
That we may bring you something on the way .

My haste may not admit it ;
Nor need you , on mine honour , have to do 
With any scruple : your scope is as mine own ,
So to enforce or qualify the laws 
As to your soul seems good . Give me your hand ;
I'll privily away : I love the people ,
But do not like to stage me to their eyes .
Though it do well , I do not relish well 
Their loud applause and Aves vehement ,
Nor do I think the man of safe discretion 
That does affect it . Once more , fare you well .

The heavens give safety to your purposes !

Lead forth and bring you back in happiness !

I thank you . Fare you well .


I shall desire you , sir , to give me leave 
To have free speech with you ; and it concerns me 
To look into the bottom of my place :
A power I have , but of what strength and nature 
I am not yet instructed .

'Tis so with me . Let us withdraw together ,
And we may soon our satisfaction have 
Touching that point .

I'll wait upon your honour .


If the Duke with the other dukes come not to composition with the King of Hungary , why then , all the dukes fall upon the king .

Heaven grant us its peace , but not the King of Hungary's !

Amen .

Thou concludest like the sanctimonious pirate , that went to sea with the Ten Commandments , but scraped one out of the table .

'Thou shalt not steal ?' 

Ay , that he razed .

Why , 'twas a commandment to command the captain and all the rest from their functions : they put forth to steal . There's not a soldier of us all , that , in the thanksgiving before meat , doth relish the petition well that prays for peace .

I never heard any soldier dislike it .

I believe thee , for I think thou never wast where grace was said .

No ? a dozen times at least .

What , in metre ?

In any proportion or in any language .

I think , or in any religion .

Ay ; why not ? Grace is grace , despite of all controversy : as , for example , thou thyself art a wicked villain , despite of all grace .

Well , there went but a pair of shears between us .

I grant ; as there may between the lists and the velvet : thou art the list .

And thou the velvet : thou art good velvet ; thou art a three-piled piece , I warrant thee . I had as lief be a list of an English kersey as be piled , as thou art piled , for a French velvet . Do I speak feelingly now ?

I think thou dost ; and , indeed , with most painful feeling of thy speech : I will , out of thine own confession , learn to begin thy health ; but , whilst I live , forget to drink after thee .

I think I have done myself wrong , have I not ?

Yes , that thou hast , whether thou art tainted or free .

Behold , behold , where Madam Mitigation comes ! I have purchased as many diseases under her roof as come to 

To what , I pray ?

Judge .

To three thousand dolours a year .

Ay , and more .

A French crown more .

Thou art always figuring diseases in me ; but thou art full of error : I am sound .

Nay , not as one would say , healthy ; but so sound as things that are hollow : thy bones are hollow ; impiety has made a feast of thee .


How now ! which of your hips has the most profound sciatica ?

Well , well ; there's one yonder arrested and carried to prison was worth five thousand of you all .

Who's that , I pray thee ?

Marry , sir , that's Claudio , Signior Claudio .

Claudio to prison ! 'tis not so .

Nay , but I know 'tis so : I saw him arrested ; saw him carried away ; and , which is more , within these three days his head to be chopped off .

But , after all this fooling , I would not have it so . Art thou sure of this ?

I am too sure of it ; and it is for getting Madam Julietta with child .

Believe me , this may be : he promised to meet me two hours since , and he was ever precise in promise-keeping .

Besides , you know , it draws something near to the speech we had to such a purpose .

But most of all , agreeing with the proclamation .

Away ! let's go learn the truth of it .


Thus , what with the war , what with the sweat , what with the gallows and what with poverty , I am custom-shrunk .

How now ! what's the news with you ?

Yonder man is carried to prison .

Well : what has he done ?

A woman .

But what's his offence ?

Groping for trouts in a peculiar river .

What , is there a maid with child by him ?

No ; but there's a woman with maid by him . You have not heard of the proclamation , have you ?

What proclamation , man ?

All houses of resort in the suburbs of Vienna must be plucked down 

And what shall become of those in the city ?

They shall stand for seed : they had gone down too , but that a wise burgher put in for them .

But shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs be pulled down ?

To the ground , mistress .

Why , here's a change indeed in the commonwealth ! What shall become of me ?

Come ; fear not you : good counsellors lack no clients : though you change your place , you need not change your trade ; I'll be your tapster still . Courage ! there will be pity taken on you ; you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service , you will be considered .

What's to do here , Thomas tapster ?
Let's withdraw .

Here comes Signior Claudio , led by the provost to prison ; and there's Madam Juliet .

Fellow , why dost thou show me thus to the world ?
Bear me to prison , where I am committed .

I do it not in evil disposition ,
But from Lord Angelo by special charge .

Thus can the demi-god Authority 
Make us pay down for our offence' by weight .
The words of heaven ; on whom it will , it will ;
On whom it will not , so : yet still 'tis just .


Why , how now , Claudio ! whence comes this restraint ?

From too much liberty , my Lucio , liberty :
As surfeit is the father of much fast ,
So every scope by the immoderate use 
Turns to restraint . Our natures do pursue 
Like rats that ravin down their proper bane ,
A thirsty evil , and when we drink we die .

If I could speak so wisely under an arrest , I would send for certain of my creditors . And yet , to say the truth , I had as lief have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment . What's thy offence , Claudio ?

What but to speak of would offend again .

What , is't murder ?

No .

Lechery ?

Call it so .

Away , sir ! you must go .

One word , good friend . Lucio , a word with you .


A hundred , if they'll do you any good .
Is lechery so looked after ?

Thus stands it with me : upon a true contract 
I got possession of Julietta's bed :
You know the lady ; she is fast my wife ,
Save that we do the denunciation lack 
Of outward order : this we came not to ,
Only for propagation of a dower 
Remaining in the coffer of her friends ,
From whom we thought it meet to hide our love 
Till time had made them for us . But it chances 
The stealth of our most mutual entertainment 
With character too gross is writ on Juliet .

With child , perhaps ?

Unhappily , even so .
And the new deputy now for the duke ,
Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness ,
Or whether that the body public be 
A horse whereon the governor doth ride ,
Who , newly in the seat , that it may know 
He can command , lets it straight feel the spur ;
Whether the tyranny be in his place ,
Or in his eminence that fills it up ,
I stagger in :but this new governor 
Awakes me all the enrolled penalties 
Which have , like unscour'd armour , hung by the wall 
So long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round ,
And none of them been worn ; and , for a name ,
Now puts the drowsy and neglected act 
Freshly on me : 'tis surely for a name .

I warrant it is : and thy head stands so tickle on thy shoulders that a milkmaid , if she be in love , may sigh it off . Send after the duke and appeal to him .

I have done so , but he's not to be found .
I prithee , Lucio , do me this kind service .
This day my sister should the cloister enter ,
And there receive her approbation :
Acquaint her with the danger of my state ;
Implore her , in my voice , that she make friends 
To the strict deputy ; bid herself assay him :
I have great hope in that ; for in her youth 
There is a prone and speechless dialect ,
Such as move men ; beside , she hath prosperous art 
When she will play with reason and discourse ,
And well she can persuade .

I pray she may : as well for the encouragement of the like , which else would stand under grievous imposition , as for the enjoying of thy life , who I would be sorry should be thus foolishly lost at a game of tick-tack . I'll to her .

I thank you , good friend Lucio .

Within two hours .

Come , officer , away !


No , holy father ; throw away that thought :
Believe not that the dribbling dart of love 
Can pierce a complete bosom . Why I desire thee 
To give me secret harbour , hath a purpose 
More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends 
Of burning youth .

May your Grace speak of it ?

My holy sir , none better knows than you 
How I have ever lov'd the life remov'd ,
And held in idle price to haunt assemblies 
Where youth , and cost , and witless bravery keeps .
I have deliver'd to Lord Angelo 
A man of stricture and firm abstinence 
My absolute power and place here in Vienna ,
And he supposes me travell'd to Poland ;
For so I have strew'd it in the common ear ,
And so it is receiv'd . Now , pious sir ,
You will demand of me why I do this ?

Gladly , my lord .

We have strict statutes and most biting laws ,
The needful bits and curbs to headstrong steeds ,
Which for this fourteen years we have let sleep ;
Even like an o'ergrown lion in a cave ,
That goes not out to prey . Now , as fond fathers ,
Having bound up the threat'ning twigs of birch ,
Only to stick it in their children's sight 
For terror , not to use , in time the rod 
Becomes more mock'd than fear'd ; so our decrees ,
Dead to infliction , to themselves are dead ,
And liberty plucks justice by the nose ;
The baby beats the nurse , and quite athwart 
Goes all decorum .

It rested in your Grace 
T' unloose this tied-up justice when you pleas'd ;
And it in you more dreadful would have seem'd 
Than in Lord Angelo .

I do fear , too dreadful :
Sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope ,
'Twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them 
For what I bid them do : for we bid this be done ,
When evil deeds have their permissive pass 
And not the punishment . Therefore , indeed , my father ,
I have on Angelo impos'd the office ,
Who may , in the ambush of my name , strike home ,
And yet my nature never in the sight 
To do it slander . And to behold his sway ,
I will , as 'twere a brother of your order ,
Visit both prince and people : therefore , I prithee ,
Supply me with the habit , and instruct me 
How I may formally in person bear me 
Like a true friar . Moe reasons for this action 
At our more leisure shall I render you ;
Only , this one : Lord Angelo is precise ;
Stands at a guard with envy ; scarce confesses 
That his blood flows , or that his appetite 
Is more to bread than stone : hence shall we see ,
If power change purpose , what our seemers be .


And have you nuns no further privileges ?

Are not these large enough ?

Yes , truly : I speak not as desiring more ,
But rather wishing a more strict restraint 
Upon the sisterhood , the votarists of Saint Clare .

Ho ! Peace be in this place !

Who's that which calls ?

It is a man's voice . Gentle Isabella ,
Turn you the key , and know his business of him :
You may , I may not ; you are yet unsworn .
When you have vow'd , you must not speak with men 
But in the presence of the prioress :
Then , if you speak , you must not show your face ,
Or , if you show your face , you must not speak .
He calls again ; I pray you , answer him .


Peace and prosperity ! Who is't that calls ?


Hail , virgin , if you be , as those cheek-roses 
Proclaim you are no less ! Can you so stead me 
As bring me to the sight of Isabella ,
A novice of this place , and the fair sister 
To her unhappy brother Claudio ?

Why 'her unhappy brother ?' let me ask ;
The rather for I now must make you know 
I am that Isabella and his sister .

Gentle and fair , your brother kindly greets you :
Not to be weary with you , he's in prison .

Woe me ! for what ?

For that which , if myself might be his judge ,
He should receive his punishment in thanks :
He hath got his friend with child .

Sir , make me not your story .

It is true .
I would not , though 'tis my familiar sin 
With maids to seem the lapwing and to jest ,
Tongue far from heart , play with all virgins so :
I hold you as a thing ensky'd and sainted ;
By your renouncement an immortal spirit ,
And to be talk'd with in sincerity ,
As with a saint .

You do blaspheme the good in mocking me .

Do not believe it . Fewness and truth , 'tis thus :
Your brother and his lover have embrac'd :
As those that feed grow full , as blossoming time 
That from the seedness the bare fallow brings 
To teeming foison , even so her plenteous womb 
Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry .

Some one with child by him ? My cousin Juliet ?

Is she your cousin ?

Adoptedly ; asschool-maids change their names 
By vain , though apt affection .

She it is .

O ! let him marry her .

This is the point .
The duke is very strangely gone from hence ;
Bore many gentlemen , myself being one ,
In hand and hope of action ; but we do learn 
By those that know the very nerves of state ,
His givings out were of an infinite distance 
From his true-meant design . Upon his place ,
And with full line of his authority ,
Governs Lord Angelo ; a man whose blood 
Is very snow-broth ; one who never feels 
The wanton stings and motions of the sense ,
But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge 
With profits of the mind , study and fast .
He ,to give fear to use and liberty ,
Which have for long run by the hideous law ,
As mice by lions , hath pick'd out an act ,
Under whose heavy sense your brother's life 
Falls into forfeit : he arrests him on it ,
And follows close the rigour of the statute ,
To make him an example . All hope is gone ,
Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer 
To soften Angelo ; and that's my pith of business 
Twixt you and your poor brother .

Doth he so seek his life ?

He's censur'd him 
Already ; and , as I hear , the provost hath 
A warrant for his execution .

Alas ! what poor ability's in me 
To do him good ?

Assay the power you have .

My power ? alas ! I doubt 

Our doubts are traitors ,
And make us lose the good we oft might win ,
By fearing to attempt . Go to Lord Angelo ,
And let him learn to know , when maidens sue ,
Men give like gods ; but when they weep and kneel ,
All their petitions are as freely theirs 
As they themselves would owe them .

I'll see what I can do .

But speedily .

I will about it straight ;
No longer staying but to give the Mother 
Notice of my affair . I humbly thank you :
Commend me to my brother ; soon at night 
I'll send him certain word of my success .

I take my leave of you .

Good sir , adieu .

We must not make a scarecrow of the law ,
Setting it up to fear the birds of prey ,
And let it keep one shape , till custom make it 
Their perch and not their terror .

Ay , but yet 
Let us be keen and rather cut a little ,
Than fall , and bruise to death . Alas ! this gentleman ,
Whom I would save , had a most noble father .
Let but your honour know ,
Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue ,
That , in the working of your own affections ,
Had time coher'd with place or place with wishing ,
Or that the resolute acting of your blood 
Could have attain'd the effect of your own purpose ,
Whether you had not , some time in your life ,
Err'd in this point which now you censure him ,
And pull'd the law upon you .

'Tis one thing to be tempted , Escalus ,
Another thing to fall . I not deny ,
The jury , passing on the prisoner's life ,
May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two 
Guiltier than him they try ; what's open made to justice ,
That justice seizes : what know the laws 
That thieves do pass on thieves ? 'Tis very pregnant ,
The jewel that we find , we stoop and take it 
Because we see it ; but what we do not see 
We tread upon , and never think of it .
You may not so extenuate his offence 
For I have had such faults ; but rather tell me ,
When I , that censure him , do so offend ,
Let mine own judgment pattern out my death ,
And nothing come in partial . Sir , he must die .

Be it as your wisdom will .

Where is the provost ?

Here , if it like your honour .

See that Claudio 
Be executed by nine to-morrow morning :
Bring him his confessor , let him be prepar'd ;
For that's the utmost of his pilgrimage .


Well , heaven forgive him , and forgive us all !
Some rise by sin , and some by virtue fall :
Some run from brakes of ice , and answer none ,
And some condemned for a fault alone .


Come , bring them away : if these be good people in a common-weal that do nothing but use their abuses in common houses , I know no law : bring them away .

How now , sir ! What's your name , and what's the matter ?

If it please your honour , I am the poor duke's constable , and my name is Elbow : I do lean upon justice , sir ; and do bring in here before your good honour two notorious benefactors .

Benefactors ! Well ; what benefactors are they ? are they not malefactors ?

If it please your honour , I know not well what they are ; but precise villains they are , that I am sure of , and void of all profanation in the world that good Christians ought to have .

This comes off well : here's a wise officer .

Go to : what quality are they of ? Elbow is your name ? why dost thou not speak , Elbow ?

He cannot , sir : he's out at elbow .

What are you , sir ?

He , sir ! a tapster , sir ; parcel-bawd ; one that serves a bad woman , whose house , sir , was , as they say , plucked down in the suburbs ; and now she professes a hot-house , which , I think , is a very ill house too .

How know you that ?

My wife , sir , whom I detest before heaven and your honour ,

How ! thy wife ?

Ay , sir ; whom , I thank heaven , is an honest woman ,

Dost thou detest her therefore ?

I say , sir , I will detest myself also , as well as she , that this house , if it be not a bawd's house , it is pity of her life , for it is a naughty house .

How dost thou know that , constable ?

Marry , sir , by my wife ; who , if she had been a woman cardinally given , might have been accused in fornication , adultery , and all uncleanliness there .

By the woman's means ?

Ay , sir , by Mistress Overdone's means ; but as she spit in his face , so she defied him .

Sir , if it please your honour , this is not so .

Prove it before these varlets here , thou honourable man , prove it .

Do you hear how he misplaces ?

Sir , she came in , great with child , and longing ,saving your honour's reverence ,for stewed prunes . Sir , we had but two in the house , which at that very distant time stood , as it were , in a fruit-dish , a dish of some three-pence ; your honours have seen such dishes ; they are not China dishes , but very good dishes .

Go to , go to : no matter for the dish , sir .

No , indeed , sir , not of a pin ; you are therein in the right : but to the point . As I say , this Mistress Elbow , being , as I say , with child , and being great-bellied , and longing , as I said , for prunes , and having but two in the dish , as I said , Master Froth here , this very man , having eaten the rest , as I said , and , as I say , paying for them very honestly ; for , as you know , Master Froth , I could not give you three-pence again .

No , indeed .

Very well : you being then , if you be remembered , cracking the stones of the foresaid prunes ,

Ay , so I did , indeed .

Why , very well : I telling you then , if you be remembered , that such a one and such a one were past cure of the thing you wot of , unless they kept very good diet , as I told you ,

All this is true .

Why , very well then .

Come , you are a tedious fool : to the purpose . What was done to Elbow's wife , that he hath cause to complain of ? Come me to what was done to her .

Sir , your honour cannot come to that yet .

No , sir , nor I mean it not .

Sir , but you shall come to it , by your honour's leave . And , I beseech you , look into Master Froth here , sir ; a man of fourscore pound a year , whose father died at Hallowmas . Was't not at Hallowmas , Master Froth ?

All-hallownd eve .

Why , very well : I hope here be truths . He , sir , sitting , as I say , in a lower chair , sir ; 'twas in the Bunch of Grapes , where indeed , you have a delight to sit , have you not ?

I have so , because it is an open room and good for winter .

Why , very well then : I hope here be truths .

This will last out a night in Russia ,
When nights are longest there : I'll take my leave ,
And leave you to the hearing of the cause ,
Hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all .

I think no less . Good morrow to your lordship .

Now , sir , come on : what was done to Elbow's wife , once more ?

Once , sir ? there was nothing done to her once .

I beseech you , sir , ask him what this man did to my wife .

I beseech your honour , ask me .

Well , sir , what did this gentleman to her ?

I beseech you , sir , look in this gentleman's face . Good Master Froth , look upon his honour ; 'tis for a good purpose . Doth your honour mark his face ?

Ay , sir , very well .

Nay , I beseech you , mark it well .

Well , I do so .

Doth your honour see any harm in his face ?

Why , no .

I'll be supposed upon a book , his face is the worst thing about him . Good , then ; if his face be the worst thing about him , how could Master Froth do the constable's wife any harm ? I would know that of your honour .

He's in the right . Constable , what say you to it ?

First , an' it like you , the house is a respected house ; next , this is a respected fellow , and his mistress is a respected woman .

By this hand , sir , his wife is a more respected person than any of us all .

Varlet , thou liest : thou liest , wicked varlet . The time is yet to come that she was ever respected with man , woman , or child .

Sir , she was respected with him before he married with her .

Which is the wiser here ? Justice , or Iniquity ? Is this true ?

O thou caitiff ! O thou varlet ! O thou wicked Hannibal ! I respected with her before I was married to her ? If ever I was respected with her , or she with me , let not your worship think me the poor duke's officer . Prove this , thou wicked Hannibal , or I'll have mine action of battery on thee .

If he took you a box o' th' ear , you might have your action of slander too .

Marry , I thank your good worship for it . What is't your worship's pleasure I shall do with this wicked caitiff ?

Truly , officer , because he hath some offences in him that thou wouldest discover if thou couldst , let him continue in his courses till thou knowest what they are .

Marry , I thank your worship for it . Thou seest , thou wicked varlet , now , what's come upon thee : thou art to continue now , thou varlet , thou art to continue .

Where were you born , friend ?

Here in Vienna , sir .

Are you of fourscore pounds a year ?

Yes , an't please you , sir .

So .

What trade are you of , sir ?

A tapster ; a poor widow's tapster .

Your mistress' name ?

Mistress Overdone .

Hath she had any more than one husband ?

Nine , sir ; Overdone by the last .

Nine !Come hither to me , Master Froth . Master Froth , I would not have you acquainted with tapsters ; they will draw you , Master Froth , and you will hang them . Get you gone , and let me hear no more of you .

I thank your worship . For mine own part , I never come into any room in a taphouse , but I am drawn in .

Well : no more of it , Master Froth : farewell .

Come you hither to me , Master tapster . What's your name , Master tapster ?

Pompey .

What else ?

Bum , sir .

Troth , and your bum is the greatest thing about you , so that , in the beastliest sense , you are Pompey the Great . Pompey , you are partly a bawd , Pompey , howsoever you colour it in being a tapster , are you not ? come , tell me true : it shall be the better for you .

Truly , sir , I am a poor fellow that would live .

How would you live , Pompey ? by being a bawd ? What do you think of the trade , Pompey ? is it a lawful trade ?

If the law would allow it , sir .

But the law will not allow it , Pompey ; nor it shall not be allowed in Vienna .

Does your worship mean to geld and splay all the youth of the city ?

No , Pompey .

Truly , sir , in my humble opinion , they will to't then . If your worship will take order for the drabs and the knaves , you need not to fear the bawds .

There are pretty orders beginning , I can tell you : it is but heading and hanging .

If you head and hang all that offend that way but for ten year together , you'll be glad to give out a commission for more heads . If this law hold in Vienna ten year , I'll rent the fairest house in it after threepence a bay . If you live to see this come to pass , say , Pompey told you so .

Thank you , good Pompey ; and , in requital of your prophecy , hark you : I advise you , let me not find you before me again upon any complaint whatsoever ; no , not for dwelling where you do : if I do , Pompey , I shall beat you to your tent , and prove a shrewd C sar to you . In plain dealing , Pompey , I shall have you whipt . So , for this time , Pompey , fare you well .

I thank your worship for your good counsel ;

but I shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall better determine .
Whip me ! No , no ; let carman whip his jade ;
The valiant heart's not whipt out of his trade .


Come hither to me , Master Elbow ; come hither , Master constable . How long have you been in this place of constable ?

Seven year and a half , sir .

I thought , by your readiness in the office , you had continued in it some time . You say , seven years together ?

And a half , sir .

Alas ! it hath been great pains to you ! They do you wrong to put you so oft upon 't . Are there not men in your ward sufficient to serve it ?

Faith , sir , few of any wit in such matters . As they are chosen , they are glad to choose me for them : I do it for some piece of money , and go through with all .

Look you bring me in the names of some six or seven , the most sufficient of your parish .

To your worship's house , sir ?

To my house . Fare you well .

What's o'clock , think you ?

Eleven , sir .

I pray you home to dinner with me .

I humbly thank you .

It grieves me for the death of Claudio ;
But there is no remedy .

Lord Angelo is severe .

It is but needful :
Mercy is not itself , that oft looks so ;
Pardon is still the nurse of second woe .
But yet , poor Claudio ! There's no remedy .
Come , sir .


He's hearing of a cause : he will come straight :
I'll tell him of you .

Pray you , do .

I'll know 
His pleasure ; may be he will relent . Alas !
He hath but as offended in a dream :
All sects , all ages smack of this vice , and he 
To die for it !


Now , what's the matter , provost ?

Is it your will Claudio shall die to-morrow ?

Did I not tell thee , yea ? hadst thou not order ?
Why dost thou ask again ?

Lest I might be too rash .
Under your good correction , I have seen ,
When , after execution , Judgment hath 
Repented o'er his doom .

Go to ; let that be mine :
Do you your office , or give up your place ,
And you shall well be spar'd .

I crave your honour's pardon .
What shall be done , sir , with the groaning Juliet ?
She's very near her hour .

Dispose of her 
To some more fitter place ; and that with speed .


Here is the sister of the man condemn'd 
Desires access to you .

Hath he a sister ?

Ay , my good lord ; a very virtuous maid ,
And to be shortly of a sisterhood ,
If not already .

Well , let her be admitted .

See you the fornicatress be remov'd :
Let her have needful , but not lavish , means ;
There shall be order for't .


God save your honour !


Stay a little while .

You're welcome : what's your will ?

I am a woful suitor to your honour ,
Please but your honour hear me .

Well ; what's your suit ?

There is a vice that most I do abhor ,
And most desire should meet the blow of justice ,
For which I would not plead , but that I must ;
For which I must not plead , but that I am 
At war 'twixt will and will not .

Well ; the matter ?

I have a brother is condemn'd to die :
I do beseech you , let it be his fault ,
And not my brother .

Heaven give thee moving graces !

Condemn the fault , and not the actor of it ?
Why , every fault's condemn'd ere it be done .
Mine were the very cipher of a function ,
To fine the faults whose fine stands in record ,
And let go by the actor .

O just , but severe law !
I had a brother , then .Heaven keep your honour !


Give't not o'er so : to him again , entreat him ;
Kneel down before him , hang upon his gown ;
You are too cold ; if you should need a pin ,
You could not with more tame a tongue desire it .
To him . I say !

Must he needs die ?

Maiden , no remedy .

Yes ; I do think that you might pardon him ,
And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy .

I will not do't .

But can you , if you would ?

Look , what I will not , that I cannot do .

But might you do't , and do the world no wrong ,
If so your heart were touch'd with that remorse 
As mine is to him ?

He's sentenc'd : 'tis too late .

You are too cold .

Too late ? why , no ; I , that do speak a word ,
May call it back again . Well , believe this ,
No ceremony that to great ones 'longs ,
Not the king's crown , nor the deputed sword ,
The marshal's truncheon , nor the judge's robe ,
Become them with one half so good a grace 
As mercy does .
If he had been as you , and you as he ,
You would have slipt like him ; but he , like you ,
Would not have been so stern .

Pray you , be gone .

I would to heaven I had your potency ,
And you were Isabel ! should it then be thus ?
No ; I would tell what 'twere to be a judge ,
And what a prisoner .

Ay , touch him ; there's the vein .

Your brother is a forfeit of the law ,
And you but waste your words .

Alas ! alas !
Why , all the souls that were were forfeit once ;
And He that might the vantage best have took ,
Found out the remedy . How would you be ,
If He , which is the top of judgment , should 
But judge you as you are ? O ! think on that ,
And mercy then will breathe within your lips ,
Like man new made .

Be you content , fair maid ;
It is the law , not I , condemn your brother :
Were he my kinsman , brother , or my son ,
It should be thus with him : he must die to-morrow .

To-morrow ! O ! that's sudden ! Spare him , spare him !
He's not prepar'd for death . Even for our kitchens 
We kill the fowl of season : shall we serve heaven 
With less respect than we do minister 
To our gross selves ? Good , good my lord , bethink you :
Who is it that hath died for this offence ?
There's many have committed it .

Ay , well said .

The law hath not been dead , though it hath slept :
Those many had not dar'd to do that evil ,
If that the first that did th' edict infringe 
Had answer'd for his deed : now 'tis awake ,
Takes note of what is done , and , like a prophet ,
Looks in a glass , that shows what future evils ,
Either new , or by remissness new-conceiv'd ,
And so in progress to be hatch'd and born ,
Are now to have no successive degrees ,
But , ere they live , to end .

Yet show some pity .

I show it most of all when I show justice ;
For then I pity those I do not know ,
Which a dismiss'd offence would after gall ,
And do him right , that , answering one foul wrong ,
Lives not to act another . Be satisfied :
Your brother dies to-morrow : be content .

So you must be the first that gives this sentence ,
And he that suffers . O ! it is excellent 
To have a giant's strength , but it is tyrannous 
To use it like a giant .

That's well said .

Could great men thunder 
As Jove himself does , Jove would ne'er be quiet ,
For every pelting , petty officer 
Would use his heaven for thunder ; nothing but thunder .
Merciful heaven !
Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt 
Split'st the unwedgeable and gnarled oak 
Than the soft myrtle ; but man , proud man ,
Drest in a little brief authority ,
Most ignorant of what he's most assur'd ,
His glassy essence , like an angry ape ,
Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven 
As make the angels weep ; who , with our spleens ,
Would all themselves laugh mortal .

O , to him , to him , wench ! He will relent :
He's coming : I perceive't .

Pray heaven she win him !

We cannot weigh our brother with ourself :
Great men may jest with saints ; 'tis wit in them ,
But , in the less foul profanation .

Thou'rt in the right , girl : more o' that .

That in the captain's but a choleric word ,
Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy .

Art advis'd o' that ? more on 't .

Why do you put these sayings upon me ?

Because authority , though it err like others ,
Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself ,
That skins the vice o' the top . Go to your bosom ;
Knock there , and ask your heart what it doth know 
That's like my brother's fault : if it confess 
A natural guiltiness such as is his ,
Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue 
Against my brother's life .

She speaks , and 'tis 
Such sense that my sense breeds with it . Fare you well .

Gentle my lord , turn back .

I will bethink me . Come again to-morrow .

Hark how I'll bribe you . Good my lord , turn back .

How ! bribe me ?

Ay , with such gifts that heaven shall share with you .

You had marr'd all else .

Not with fond sicles of the tested gold ,
Or stones whose rates are either rich or poor 
As fancy values them ; but with true prayers 
That shall be up at heaven and enter there 
Ere sun-rise : prayers from preserved souls ,
From fasting maids whose minds are dedicate 
To nothing temporal .

Well ; come to me to-morrow .

Go to ; 'tis well : away !

Heaven keep your honour safe !

Amen :
For I am that way going to temptation ,
Where prayers cross .

At what hour to-morrow 
Shall I attend your lordship ?

At any time 'fore noon .

Save your honour !


From thee ; even from thy virtue !
What's this ? what's this ? Is this her fault or mine ?
The tempter or the tempted , who sins most ?
Ha !
Not she ; nor doth she tempt : but it is I ,
That , lying by the violet in the sun ,
Do as the carrion does , not as the flower ,
Corrupt with virtuous season . Can it be 
That modesty may more betray our sense 
Than woman's lightness ? Having waste ground enough ,
Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary ,
And pitch our evils there ? O , fie , fie , fie !
What dost thou , or what art thou , Angelo ?
Dost thou desire her foully for those things 
That make her good ? O , let her brother live !
Thieves for their robbery have authority 
When judges steal themselves . What ! do I love her ,
That I desire to hear her speak again ,
And feast upon her eyes ? What is't I dream on ?
O cunning enemy , that , to catch a saint ,
With saints dost bait thy hook ! Most dangerous 
Is that temptation that doth goad us on 
To sin in loving virtue : never could the strumpet ,
With all her double vigour , art and nature ,
Once stir my temper ; but this virtuous maid 
Subdues me quite . Ever till now ,
When men were fond , I smil'd and wonder'd how .


Hail to you , provost ! so I think you are .

I am the provost . What's your will , good friar ?

Bound by my charity and my bless'd order ,
I come to visit the afflicted spirits 
Here in the prison : do me the common right 
To let me see them and to make me know 
The nature of their crimes , that I may minister 
To them accordingly .

I would do more than that , if more were needful .
Look , here comes one : a gentlewoman of mine ,
Who , falling in the flaws of her own youth ,
Hath blister'd her report . She is with child ,
And he that got it , sentenc'd ; a young man 
More fit to do another such offence ,
Than die for this .


When must he die ?

As I do think , to-morrow .


I have provided for you : stay a while ,
And you shall be conducted .

Repent you , fair one , of the sin you carry ?

I do , and bear the shame most patiently .

I'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience ,
And try your penitence , if it be sound ,
Or hollowly put on .

I'll gladly learn .

Love you the man that wrong'd you ?

Yes , as I love the woman that wrong'd him .

So then it seems your most offenceful act 
Was mutually committed ?

Mutually .

Then was your sin of heavier kind than his .

I do confess it , and repent it , father .

'Tis meet so , daughter : but lest you do repent ,
As that the sin hath brought you to this shame ,
Which sorrow is always toward ourselves , not heaven ,
Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it ,
But as we stand in fear ,

I do repent me , as it is an evil ,
And take the shame with joy .

There rest .
Your partner , as I hear , must die to-morrow ,
And I am going with instruction to him .
God's grace go with you ! Benedicite !


Must die to-morrow ! O injurious love ,
That respites me a life , whose very comfort 
Is still a dying horror !

'Tis pity of him .


When I would pray and think , I think and pray 
To several subjects : heaven hath my empty words ,
Whilst my invention , hearing not my tongue ,
Anchors on Isabel : heaven in my mouth ,
As if I did but only chew his name ,
And in my heart the strong and swelling evil 
Of my conception . The state , whereon I studied ,
Is like a good thing , being often read ,
Grown fear'd and tedious ; yea , my gravity ,
Wherein , let no man hear me , I take pride ,
Could I with boot change for an idle plume ,
Which the air beats for vain . O place ! O form !
How often dost thou with thy case , thy habit ,
Wrench awe from fools , and tie the wiser souls 
To thy false seeming ! Blood , thou art blood :
Let's write good angel on the devil's horn ,
'Tis not the devil's crest .

How now ! who's there ?

One Isabel , a sister ,
Desires access to you .

Teach her the way .

O heavens !
Why does my blood thus muster to my heart ,
Making both it unable for itself ,
And dispossessing all my other parts 
Of necessary fitness ?
So play the foolish throngs with one that swounds ;
Come all to help him , and so stop the air 
By which he should revive : and even so 
The general , subject to a well-wish'd king ,
Quit their own part , and in obsequious fondness 
Crowd to his presence , where their untaught love 
Must needs appear offence .

How now , fair maid !

I am come to know your pleasure .

That you might know it , would much better please me ,
Than to demand what 'tis . Your brother cannot live .

Even so . Heaven keep your honour !

Yet may he live awhile ; and , it may be ,
As long as you or I : yet he must die .

Under your sentence ?

Yea .

When , I beseech you ? that in his reprieve ,
Longer or shorter , he may be so fitted 
That his soul sicken not .

Ha ! fie , these filthy vices ! It were as good 
To pardon him that hath from nature stolen 
A man already made , as to remit 
Their saucy sweetness that do coin heaven's image 
In stamps that are forbid : 'tis all as easy 
Falsely to take away a life true made ,
As to put metal in restrained means 
To make a false one .

'Tis set down so in heaven , but not in earth .

Say you so ? then I shall pose you quickly .
Which had you rather , that the most just law 
Now took your brother's life ; or , to redeem him ,
Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness 
As she that he hath stain'd ?

Sir , believe this ,
I had rather give my body than my soul .

I talk not of your soul . Our compell'd sins 
Stand more for number than for accompt .

How say you ?

Nay , I'll not warrant that ; for I can speak 
Against the thing I say . Answer to this :
I , now the voice of the recorded law ,
Pronounce a sentence on your brother's life :
Might there not be a charity in sin 
To save this brother's life ?

Please you to do't ,
I'll take it as a peril to my soul ;
It is no sin at all , but charity .

Pleas'd you to do't , at peril of your soul ,
Were equal poise of sin and charity .

That I do beg his life , if it be sin ,
Heaven let me bear it ! you granting of my suit ,
If that be sin , I'll make it my morn prayer 
To have it added to the faults of mine ,
And nothing of your answer .

Nay , but hear me .
Your sense pursues not mine : either you are ignorant ,
Or seem so craftily ; and that's not good .

Let me be ignorant , and in nothing good ,
But graciously to know I am no better .

Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright 
When it doth tax itself ; as these black masks 
Proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder 
Than beauty could , display'd . But mark me ;
To be received plain , I'll speak more gross :
Your brother is to die .

So .

And his offence is so , as it appears 
Accountant to the law upon that pain .

True .

Admit no other way to save his life ,
As I subscribe not that , nor any other ,
But in the loss of question ,that you , his sister ,
Finding yourself desir'd of such a person ,
Whose credit with the judge , or own great place ,
Could fetch your brother from the manacles 
Of the all-building law ; and that there were 
No earthly mean to save him , but that either 
You must lay down the treasures of your body 
To this suppos'd , or else to let him suffer ;
What would you do ?

As much for my poor brother , as myself :
That is , were I under the terms of death ,
Th' impression of keen whips I'd wear as rubies ,
And strip myself to death , as to a bed 
That , longing , have been sick for , ere I'd yield 
My body up to shame .

Then must your brother die .

And 'twere the cheaper way :
Better it were a brother died at once ,
Than that a sister , by redeeming him ,
Should die for ever .

Were not you then as cruel as the sentence 
That you have slander'd so ?

Ignomy in ransom and free pardon 
Are of two houses : lawful mercy 
Is nothing kin to foul redemption .

You seem'd of late to make the law a tyrant ;
And rather prov'd the sliding of your brother 
A merriment than a vice .

O , pardon me , my lord ! it oft falls out ,
To have what we would have , we speak not what we mean .
I something do excuse the thing I hate ,
For his advantage that I dearly love .

We are all frail .

Else let my brother die ,
If not a feodary , but only he 
Owe and succeed thy weakness .

Nay , women are frail too .

Ay , as the glasses where they view themselves ,
Which are as easy broke as they make forms .
Women ! Help heaven ! men their creation mar 
In profiting by them . Nay , call us ten times frail ,
For we are soft as our complexions are ,
And credulous to false prints .

I think it well :
And from this testimony of your own sex ,
Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger 
Than faults may shake our frames ,let me be bold ;
I do arrest your words . Be that you are ,
That is , a woman ; if you be more , you're none ;
If you be one , as you are well express'd 
By all external warrants , show it now ,
By putting on the destin'd livery .

I have no tongue but one : gentle my lord ,
Let me entreat you speak the former language .

Plainly conceive , I love you .

My brother did love Juliet ; and you tell me 
That he shall die for't .

He shall not , Isabel , if you give me love .

I know your virtue hath a licence in't .
Which seems a little fouler than it is ,
To pluck on others .

Believe me , on mine honour ,
My words express my purpose .

Ha ! little honour to be much believ'd ,
And most pernicious purpose ! Seeming , seeming !
I will proclaim thee , Angelo ; look for't :
Sign me a present pardon for my brother ,
Or with an outstretch'd throat I'll tell the world aloud 
What man thou art .

Who will believe thee , Isabel ?
My unsoil'd name , the austereness of my life ,
My vouch against you , and my place i' the state ,
Will so your accusation overweigh ,
That you shall stifle in your own report 
And smell of calumny . I have begun ;
And now I give my sensual race the rein :
Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite ;
Lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes ,
That banish what they sue for ; redeem thy brother 
By yielding up thy body to my will ,
Or else he must not only die the death ,
But thy unkindness shall his death draw out 
To lingering sufferance . Answer me to-morrow ,
Or , by the affection that now guides me most ,
I'll prove a tyrant to him . As for you ,
Say what you can , my false o'erweighs your true .


To whom should I complain ? Did I tell this ,
Who would believe me ? O perilous mouths !
That bear in them one and the self-same tongue ,
Either of condemnation or approof ,
Bidding the law make curt'sy to their will ;
Hooking both right and wrong to th' appetite ,
To follow as it draws . I'll to my brother :
Though he hath fallen by prompture of the blood ,
Yet hath he in him such a mind of honour ,
That , had he twenty heads to tender down 
On twenty bloody blocks , he'd yield them up ,
Before his sister should her body stoop 
To such abhorr'd pollution .
Then , Isabel , live chaste , and , brother , die :
More than our brother is our chastity .
I'll tell him yet of Angelo's request ,
And fit his mind to death , for his soul's rest .

So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo ?

The miserable have no other medicine 
But only hope :
I have hope to live , and am prepar'd to die .

Be absolute for death ; either death or life 
Shall thereby be the sweeter . Reason thus with life :
If I do lose thee , I do lose a thing 
That none but fools would keep : a breath thou art ,
Servile to all the skyey influences ,
That dost this habitation , where thou keep'st ,
Hourly afflict . Merely , thou art death's fool ;
For him thou labour'st by thy flight to shun ,
And yet run'st toward him still . Thou art not noble :
For all th' accommodations that thou bear'st 
Are nurs'd by baseness . Thou art by no means valiant ;
For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork 
Of a poor worm . Thy best of rest is sleep ,
And that thou oft provok'st ; yet grossly fear'st 
Thy death , which is no more . Thou art not thyself ;
For thou exist'st on many a thousand grains 
That issue out of dust . Happy thou art not ;
For what thou hast not , still thou striv'st to get ,
And what thou hast , forget'st . Thou art not certain ;
For thy complexion shifts to strange effects ,
After the moon . If thou art rich , thou'rt poor ;
For , like an ass whose back with ingots bows ,
Thou bear'st thy heavy riches but a journey ,
And death unloads thee . Friend hast thou none ;
For thine own bowels , which do call thee sire ,
The mere effusion of thy proper loins ,
Do curse the gout , serpigo , and the rheum ,
For ending thee no sooner . Thou hast nor youth nor age ;
But , as it were , an after-dinner's sleep ,
Dreaming on both ; for all thy blessed youth 
Becomes as aged , and doth beg the alms 
Of palsied eld ; and when thou art old and rich ,
Thou hast neither heat , affection , limb , nor beauty ,
To make thy riches pleasant . What's yet in this 
That bears the name of life ? Yet in this life 
Lie hid moe thousand deaths : yet death we fear ,
That makes these odds all even .

I humbly thank you .
To sue to live , I find I seek to die ,
And , seeking death , find life : let it come on .

What ho ! Peace here ; grace and good company !

Who's there ? come in : the wish deserves a welcome .

Dear sir , ere long I'll visit you again .

Most holy sir , I thank you .


My business is a word or two with Claudio .

And very welcome . Look , signior ; here's your sister .

Provost , a word with you .

As many as you please .

Bring me to hear them speak , where I may be conceal'd .


Now , sister , what's the comfort ?

Why , as all comforts are ; most good , most good indeed .
Lord Angelo , having affairs to heaven ,
Intends you for his swift ambassador ,
Where you shall be an everlasting leiger :
Therefore , your best appointment make with speed ;
To-morrow you set on .

Is there no remedy ?

None , but such remedy , as to save a head 
To cleave a heart in twain .

But is there any ?

Yes , brother , you may live :
There is a devilish mercy in the judge ,
If you'll implore it , that will free your life ,
But fetter you till death .

Perpetual durance ?

Ay , just ; perpetual durance , a restraint ,
Though all the world's vastidity you had ,
To a determin'd scope .

But in what nature ?

In such a one as , you consenting to't ,
Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear ,
And leave you naked .

Let me know the point .

O , I do fear thee , Claudio ; and I quake ,
Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain ,
And six or seven winters more respect 
Than a perpetual honour . Dar'st thou die ?
The sense of death is most in apprehension ,
And the poor beetle , that we tread upon ,
In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great 
As when a giant dies .

Why give you me this shame ?
Think you I can a resolution fetch 
From flowery tenderness ? If I must die ,
I will encounter darkness as a bride ,
And hug it in mine arms .

There spake my brother : there my father's grave 
Did utter forth a voice . Yes , thou must die :
Thou art too noble to conserve a life 
In base appliances . This outward-sainted deputy ,
Whose settled visage and deliberate word 
Nips youth i' the head , and follies doth enmew 
As falcon doth the fowl , is yet a devil ;
His filth within being cast , he would appear 
A pond as deep as hell .

The prenzie Angelo ?

O , 'tis the cunning livery of hell ,
The damned'st body to invest and cover 
In prenzie guards ! Dost thou think , Claudio ?
If I would yield him my virginity ,
Thou mightst be freed .

O heavens ! it cannot be .

Yes , he would give't thee , from this rank offence ,
So to offend him still . This night's the time 
That I should do what I abhor to name ,
Or else thou diest to-morrow .

Thou shalt not do't .

O ! were it but my life ,
I'd throw it down for your deliverance 
As frankly as a pin .

Thanks , dear Isabel .

Be ready , Claudio , for your death to-morrow .

Yes . Has he affections in him ,
That thus can make him bite the law by the nose ,
When he would force it ? Sure , it is no sin ;
Or of the deadly seven it is the least .

Which is the least ?

If it were damnable , he being so wise ,
Why would he for the momentary trick 
Be perdurably fin'd ? O Isabel !

What says my brother ?

Death is a fearful thing .

And shamed life a hateful .

Ay , but to die , and go we know not where ;
To lie in cold obstruction and to rot ;
This sensible warm motion to become 
A kneaded clod ; and the delighted spirit 
To bathe in fiery floods , or to reside 
In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice ;
To be imprison'd in the viewless winds ,
And blown with restless violence round about 
The pendant world ; or to be worse than worst 
Of those that lawless and incertain thoughts 
Imagine howling : 'tis too horrible !
The weariest and most loathed worldly life 
That age , ache , penury and imprisonment 
Can lay on nature is a paradise 
To what we fear of death .

Alas ! alas !

Sweet sister , let me live :
What sin you do to save a brother's life ,
Nature dispenses with the deed so far 
That it becomes a virtue .

O you beast !
O faithless coward ! O dishonest wretch !
Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice ?
Is't not a kind of incest , to take life 
From thine own sister's shame ? What should I think ?
Heaven shield my mother play'd my father fair ;
For such a warped slip of wilderness 
Ne'er issu'd from his blood . Take my defiance ;
Die , perish ! Might but my bending down 
Reprieve thee from thy fate , it should proceed .
I'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death ,
No word to save thee .

Nay , hear me , Isabel .

O , fie , fie , fie !
Thy sin's not accidental , but a trade .
Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd :
'Tis best that thou diest quickly .


O hear me , Isabella .


Vouchsafe a word , young sister , but one word .

What is your will ?

Might you dispense with your leisure , I would by and by have some speech with you : the satisfaction I would require is likewise your own benefit .

I have no superfluous leisure : my stay must be stolen out of other affairs ; but I will attend you a while .

Son , I have overheard what hath past between you and your sister . Angelo had never the purpose to corrupt her ; only he hath made an assay of her virtue to practise his judgment with the disposition of natures . She , having the truth of honour in her , hath made him that gracious denial which he is most glad to receive : I am confessor to Angelo , and I know this to be true ; therefore prepare yourself to death . Do not satisfy your resolution with hopes that are fallible : to-morrow you must die ; go to your knees and make ready .

Let me ask my sister pardon . I am so out of love with life that I will sue to be rid of it .

Hold you there : farewell .


Provost , a word with you .

What's your will , father ?

That now you are come , you will be gone . Leave me awhile with the maid : my mind promises with my habit no loss shall touch her by my company .

In good time .


The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good : the goodness that is cheap in beauty makes beauty brief in goodness ; but grace , being the soul of your complexion , shall keep the body of it ever fair . The assault that Angelo hath made to you , fortune hath conveyed to my understanding ; and , but that frailty hath examples for his falling , I should wonder at Angelo . How would you do to content this substitute , and to save your brother ?

I am now going to resolve him ; I had rather my brother die by the law than my son should be unlawfully born . But O , how much is the good duke deceived in Angelo ! If ever he return and I can speak to him . I will open my lips in vain , or discover his government .

That shall not be much amiss : yet , as the matter now stands , he will avoid your accusation ; 'he made trial of you only .' Therefore , fasten your ear on my advisings : to the love I have in doing good a remedy presents itself . I do make myself believe that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged lady a merited benefit , redeem your brother from the angry law , do no stain to your own gracious person , and much please the absent duke , if peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of this business .

Let me hear you speak further . I have spirit to do anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit .

Virtue is bold , and goodness never fearful . Have you not heard speak of Mariana , the sister of Frederick , the great soldier who miscarried at sea ?

I have heard of the lady , and good words went with her name .

She should this Angelo have married ; was affianced to her by oath , and the nuptial appointed : between which time of the contract , and limit of the solemnity , her brother Frederick was wracked at sea , having in that perished vessel the dowry of his sister . But mark how heavily this befell to the poor gentlewoman : there she lost a noble and renowned brother , in his love toward her ever most kind and natural ; with him the portion and sinew of her fortune , her marriage-dowry with both , her combinate husband , this well-seeming Angelo .

Can this be so ? Did Angelo so leave her ?

Left her in her tears , and dried not one of them with his comfort ; swallowed his vows whole , pretending in her discoveries of dishonour : in few , bestowed her on her own lamentation , which she yet wears for his sake ; and he , a marble to her tears , is washed with them , but relents not .

What a merit were it in death to take this poor maid from the world ! What corruption in this life , that it will let this man live ! But how out of this can she avail ?

It is a rupture that you may easily heal ; and the cure of it not only saves your brother , but keeps you from dishonour in doing it .

Show me how , good father .

This forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance of her first affection : his unjust unkindness , that in all reason should have quenched her love , hath , like an impediment in the current , made it more violent and unruly . Go you to Angelo : answer his requiring with a plausible obedience : agree with his demands to the point ; only refer yourself to this advantage , first , that your stay with him may not be long , that the time may have all shadow and silence in it , and the place answer to convenience . This being granted in course , and now follows all , we shall advise this wronged maid to stead up your appointment , go in your place ; if the encounter acknowledge itself hereafter , it may compel him to her recompense ; and here by this is your brother saved , your honour untainted , the poor Mariana advantaged , and the corrupt deputy scaled . The maid will I frame and make fit for his attempt . If you think well to carry this , as you may , the doubleness of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof . What think you of it ?

The image of it gives me content already , and I trust it will grow to a most prosperous perfection .

It lies much in your holding up . Haste you speedily to Angelo : if for this night he entreat you to his bed , give him promise of satisfaction . I will presently to St . Luke's ; there , at the moated grange , resides this dejected Mariana : at that place call upon me , and dispatch with Angelo , that it may be quickly .

I thank you for this comfort . Fare you well , good father .


Nay , if there be no remedy for it , but that you will needs buy and sell men and women like beasts , we shall have all the world drink brown and white bastard .

O heavens ! what stuff is here ?

'Twas never merry world , since , of two usuries , the merriest was put down , and the worser allowed by order of law a furred gown to keep him warm ; and furred with fox and lamb skins too , to signify that craft , being richer than innocency , stands for the facing .

Come your way , sir . Bless you , good father friar .

And you , good brother father . What offence hath this man made you , sir ?

Marry , sir , he hath offended the law : and , sir , we take him to be a thief too , sir ; for we have found upon him , sir , a strange picklock , which we have sent to the deputy .

Fie , sirrah : a bawd , a wicked bawd !
The evil that thou causest to be done ,
That is thy means to live . Do thou but think 
What 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back 
From such a filthy vice : say to thyself ,
From their abominable and beastly touches 
I drink , I eat , array myself , and live .
Canst thou believe thy living is a life ,
So stinkingly depending ? Go mend , go mend .

Indeed , it does stink in some sort , sir ; but yet , sir , I would prove 

Nay , if the devil have given thee proofs for sin ,
Thou wilt prove his . Take him to prison , officer ;
Correction and instruction must both work 
Ere this rude beast will profit .

He must before the deputy , sir ; he has given him warning . The deputy cannot abide a whoremaster : if he be a whoremonger , and comes before him , he were as good go a mile on his errand .

That we were all , as some would seem to be ,
From our faults , as faults from seeming , free !

His neck will come to your waist ,a cord , sir .

I spy comfort : I cry , bail . Here's a gentleman and a friend of mine .


How now , noble Pompey ! What , at the wheels of C sar ? Art thou led in triumph ? What , is there none of Pygmalion's images , newly made woman , to he had now , for putting the hand in the pocket and extracting it clutched ? What reply ? ha ? What say'st thou to this tune , matter and method ? Is't not drowned i' the last rain , ha ? What sayest thou Trot ? Is the world as it was , man ? Which is the way ? Is it sad , and few words , or how ? The trick of it ?

Still thus , and thus , still worse !

How doth my dear morsel , thy mistress ? Procures she still , ha ?

Troth , sir , she hath eaten up all her beef , and she is herself in the tub .

Why , 'tis good ; it is the right of it ; it must be so : ever your fresh whore and your powdered bawd : an unshunned consequence ; it must be so . Art going to prison , Pompey ?

Yes , faith , sir .

Why , 'tis not amiss , Pompey . Farewell . Go , say I sent thee thither . For debt , Pompey ? or how ?

For being a bawd , for being a bawd .

Well , then , imprison him . If imprisonment be the due of a bawd , why , 'tis his right : bawd is he , doubtless , and of antiquity too ; bawd-born . Farewell , good Pompey . Commend me to the prison , Pompey . You will turn good husband now , Pompey ; you will keep the house .

I hope , sir , your good worship will be my bail .

No , indeed will I not , Pompey ; it is not the wear . I will pray , Pompey , to increase your bondage : if you take it not patiently , why , your mettle is the more . Adieu , trusty Pompey . Bless you , friar .

And you .

Does Bridget paint still , Pompey , ha ?

Come your ways , sir ; come .

You will not bail me then , sir ?

Then , Pompey , nor now . What news abroad , friar ? What news ?

Come your ways , sir ; come .

Go to kennel , Pompey ; go .

What news , friar , of the duke ?

I know none . Can you tell me of any ?

Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia ; other some , he is in Rome : but where is he , think you ?

I know not where ; but wheresoever , I wish him well .

It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the state , and usurp the beggary he was never born to . Lord Angelo dukes it well in his absence ; he puts transgression to't .

He does well in't .

A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in him : something too crabbed that way , friar .

It is too general a vice , and severity must cure it .

Yes , in good sooth , the vice is of a great kindred ; it is well allied ; but it is impossible to extirp it quite , friar , till eating and drinking be put down . They say this Angelo was not made by man and woman after this downright way of creation : is it true , think you ?

How should he be made , then ?

Some report a sea-maid spawn'd him ; some that he was begot between two stock-fishes . But it is certain that when he makes water his urine is congealed ice ; that I know to be true ; and he is a motion generative ; that's infallible .

You are pleasant , sir , and speak apace .

Why , what a ruthless thing is this in him , for the rebellion of a cod-piece to take away the life of a man ! Would the duke that is absent have done this ? Ere he would have hanged a man for the getting a hundred bastards , he would have paid for the nursing a thousand : he had some feeling of the sport ; he knew the service , and that instructed him to mercy .

I never heard the absent duke much detected for women ; he was not inclined that way .

O , sir , you are deceived .

'Tis not possible .

Who ? not the duke ? yes , your beggar of fifty , and his use was to put a ducat in her clack-dish ; the duke had crotchets in him . He would be drunk too ; that let me inform you .

You do him wrong , surely .

Sir , I was an inward of his . A shy fellow was the duke ; and , I believe I know the cause of his withdrawing .

What , I prithee , might be the cause ?

No , pardon ; 'tis a secret must be locked within the teeth and the lips ; but this I can let you understand , the greater file of the subject held the duke to be wise .

Wise ! why , no question but he was .

A very superficial , ignorant , unweighing fellow .

Either this is envy in you , folly , or mistaking : the very stream of his life and the business he hath helmed must , upon a warranted need , give him a better proclamation . Let him be but testimonied in his own bringings forth , and he shall appear to the envious a scholar , a statesman and a soldier . Therefore you speak unskilfully ; or , if your knowledge be more , it is much darkened in your malice .

Sir , I know him , and I love him .

Love talks with better knowledge , and knowledge with dearer love .

Come , sir , I know what I know .

I can hardly believe that , since you know not what you speak . But , if ever the duke return ,as our prayers are he may ,let me desire you to make your answer before him : if it be honest you have spoke , you have courage to maintain it . I am bound to call upon you ; and , I pray you , your name ?

Sir , my name is Lucio , well known to the duke .

He shall know you better , sir , if I may live to report you .

I fear you not .

O ! you hope the duke will return no more , or you imagine me too unhurtful an opposite . But indeed I can do you little harm ; you'll forswear this again .

I'll be hanged first : thou art deceived in me , friar . But no more of this . Canst thou tell if Claudio die to-morrow or no ?

Why should he die , sir ?

Why ? for filling a bottle with a tundish . I would the duke we talk of were returned again : this ungenitured agent will unpeople the province with continency ; sparrows must not build in his house-eaves , because they are lecherous . The duke yet would have dark deeds darkly answered ; he would never bring them to light : would he were returned ! Marry , this Claudio is condemned for untrussing . Farewell , good friar ; I prithee , pray for me . The duke , I say to thee again , would eat mutton on Fridays . He's not past it yet , and I say to thee , he would mouth with a beggar , though she smelt brown bread and garlic : say that I said so . Farewell .


No might nor greatness in mortality 
Can censure 'scape : back-wounding calumny 
The whitest virtue strikes . What king so strong 
Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue ?
But who comes here ?


Go ; away with her to prison !

Good my lord , be good to me ; your honour is accounted a merciful man ; good my lord .

Double and treble admonition , and still forfeit in the same kind ? This would make mercy swear , and play the tyrant .

A bawd of eleven years' continuance , may it please your honour .

My lord , this is one Lucio's information against me . Mistress Kate Keepdown was with child by him in the duke's time ; he promised her marriage ; his child is a year and a quarter old , come Philip and Jacob : I have kept it myself , and see how he goes about to abuse me !

That fellow is a fellow of much licence : let him be called before us . Away with her to prison ! Go to ; no more words .

Provost , my brother Angelo will not be altered ; Claudio must die to-morrow . Let him be furnished with divines , and have all charitable preparation : if my brother wrought by my pity , it should not be so with him .

So please you , this friar hath been with him , and advised him for the entertainment of death .

Good even , good father .

Bliss and goodness on you !

Of whence are you ?

Not of this country , though my chance is now 
To use it for my time : I am a brother 
Of gracious order , late come from the See ,
In special business from his Holiness .

What news abroad i' the world ?

None , but there is so great a fever on goodness , that the dissolution of it must cure it : novelty is only in request ; and it is as dangerous to be aged in any kind of course , as it is virtuous to be constant in any undertaking : there is scarce truth enough alive to make societies secure , but security enough to make fellowships accursed . Much upon this riddle runs the wisdom of the world . This news is old enough , yet it is every day's news . I pray you , sir , of what disposition was the duke ?

One that , above all other strifes , contended especially to know himself .

What pleasure was he given to ?

Rather rejoicing to see another merry , than merry at anything which professed to make him rejoice : a gentleman of all temperance . But leave we him to his events , with a prayer they may prove prosperous ; and let me desire to know how you find Claudio prepared . I am made to understand , that you have lent him visitation .

He professes to have received no sinister measure from his judge , but most willingly humbles himself to the determination of justice ; yet had he framed to himself , by the instruction of his frailty , many deceiving promises of life , which I , by my good leisure have discredited to him , and now is he resolved to die .

You have paid the heavens your function , and the prisoner the very debt of your calling . I have laboured for the poor gentleman to the extremest shore of my modesty ; but my brother justice have I found so severe , that he hath forced me to tell him he is indeed Justice .

If his own life answer the straitness of his proceeding , it shall become him well ; wherein if he chance to fail , he hath sentenced himself .

I am going to visit the prisoner . Fare you well .

Peace be with you !

He , who the sword of heaven will bear 
Should be as holy as severe ;
Pattern in himself to know ,
Grace to stand , and virtue go ;
More nor less to others paying 
Than by self offences weighing .
Shame to him whose cruel striking 
Kills for faults of his own liking !
Twice treble shame on Angelo ,
To weed my vice and let his grow !
O , what may man within him hide ,
Though angel on the outward side !
How many likeness made in crimes ,
Making practice on the times ,
To draw with idle spiders' strings 
Most pond'rous and substantial things !
Craft against vice I must apply :
With Angelo to-night shall lie 
His old betrothed but despis'd :
So disguise shall , by the disguis'd ,
Pay with falsehood false exacting ,
And perform an old contracting .

Take , O take those lips away ,
That so sweetly were forsworn ;
And those eyes , the break of day ,
Lights that do mislead the morn :
But my kisses bring again ,
bring again ,
Seals of love , but seal'd in vain ,
seal'd in vain .


Break off thy song , and haste thee quick away :
Here comes a man of comfort , whose advice 
Hath often still'd my brawling discontent .

I cry you mercy , sir ; and well could wish 
You had not found me here so musical :
Let me excuse me , and believe me so ,

My mirth it much displeas'd , but pleas'd my woe .

'Tis good ; though music oft hath such a charm 
To make bad good , and good provoke to harm .
I pray you tell me , hath anybody inquired for me here to-day ? much upon this time have I promised here to meet .

You have not been inquired after : I have sat here all day .

I do constantly believe you . The time is come even now . I shall crave your forbearance a little ; may be I will call upon you anon , for some advantage to yourself .

I am always bound to you .

Very well met , and well come .
What is the news from this good deputy ?

He hath a garden circummur'd with brick ,
Whose western side is with a vineyard back'd ;
And to that vineyard is a planched gate ,
That makes his opening with this bigger key ;
This other doth command a little door 
Which from the vineyard to the garden leads ;
There have I made my promise 
Upon the heavy middle of the night 
To call upon him .

But shall you on your knowledge find this way ?

I have ta'en a due and wary note upon't :
With whispering and most guilty diligence ,
In action all of precept , he did show me 
The way twice o'er .

Are there no other tokens 
Between you 'greed concerning her observance ?

No , none , but only a repair i' the dark ;
And that I have possess'd him my most stay 
Can be but brief ; for I have made him know 
I have a servant comes with me along ,
That stays upon me , whose persuasion is 
I come about my brother .

'Tis well borne up .
I have not yet made known to Mariana 
A word of this . What ho ! within ! come forth .


I pray you , be acquainted with this maid ;

She comes to do you good .

I do desire the like .

Do you persuade yourself that I respect you ?

Good friar , I know you do , and oft have found it .

Take then this your companion by the hand ,
Who hath a story ready for your ear .
I shall attend your leisure : but make haste ;
The vaporous night approaches .

Will't please you walk aside ?


O place and greatness ! millions of false eyes 
Are stuck upon thee : volumes of report 
Run with these false and most contrarious quests 
Upon thy doings : thousand escapes of wit 
Make thee the father of their idle dream ,
And rack thee in their fancies !

Welcome ! How agreed ?

She'll take the enterprise upon her , father ,
If you advise it .

It is not my consent ,
But my entreaty too .

Little have you to say 
When you depart from him , but , soft and low ,
'Remember now my brother .' 

Fear me not .

Nor , gentle daughter , fear you not at all .
He is your husband on a pre-contract :
To bring you thus together , 'tis no sin ,
Sith that the justice of your title to him 
Doth flourish the deceit . Come , let us go :
Our corn's to reap , for yet our tithe's to sow .


Come hither , sirrah . Can you cut off a man's head ?

If the man be a bachelor , sir , I can ; but if he be a married man , he is his wife's head , and I can never cut off a woman's head .

Come , sir , leave me your snatches , and yield me a direct answer . To-morrow morning are to die Claudio and Barnardine . Here is in our prison a common executioner , who in his office lacks a helper : if you will take it on you to assist him , it shall redeem you from your gyves ; if not , you shall have your full time of imprisonment , and your deliverance with an unpitied whipping , for you have been a notorious bawd .

Sir , I have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind ; but yet I will be content to be a lawful hangman . I would be glad to receive some instruction from my fellow partner .

What ho , Abhorson ! Where's Abhorson , there ?


Do you call , sir ?

Sirrah , here's a fellow will help you to-morrow in your execution . If you think it meet , compound with him by the year , and let him abide here with you ; if not , use him for the present , and dismiss him . He cannot plead his estimation with you ; he hath been a bawd .

A bawd , sir ? Fie upon him ! he will discredit our mystery .

Go to , sir ; you weigh equally ; a feather will turn the scale .


Pray , sir , by your good favour for surely , sir , a good favour you have , but that you have a hanging look ,do you call , sir , your occupation a mystery ?

Ay , sir ; a mystery .

Painting , sir , I have heard say , is a mystery ; and your whores , sir , being members of my occupation , using painting , do prove my occupation a mystery : but what mystery there should be in hanging , if I should be hanged , I cannot imagine .

Sir , it is a mystery .

Proof ?

Every true man's apparel fits your thief .

If it be too little for your thief , your true man thinks it big enough ; if it be too big for your thief , your thief thinks it little enough : so , every true man's apparel fits your thief .


Are you agreed ?

Sir , I will serve him ; for I do find that your hangman is a more penitent trade than your bawd , he doth often ask forgiveness .

You , sirrah , provide your block and your axe to-morrow four o'clock .

Come on , bawd ; I will instruct thee in my trade ; follow .

I do desire to learn , sir ; and , I hope , if you have occasion to use me for your own turn , you shall find me yare ; for , truly , sir , for your kindness I owe you a good turn .

Call hither Barnardine and Claudio :

The one has my pity ; not a jot the other ,
Being a murderer , though he were my brother .


Look , here's the warrant , Claudio , for thy death :
'Tis now dead midnight , and by eight to-morrow 

Thou must be made immortal . Where's Barnardine ?

As fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour 
When it lies starkly in the traveller's bones ;
He will not wake .

Who can do good on him ?
Well , go ; prepare yourself .

But hark , what noise ?
Heaven give your spirits comfort !

By and by .
I hope it is some pardon or reprieve 
For the most gentle Claudio .

Welcome , father .

The best and wholesom'st spirits of the night 
Envelop you , good provost ! Who call'd here of late ?

None since the curfew rung .

Not Isabel ?

No .

They will , then , ere't be long .

What comfort is for Claudio ?

There's some in hope .

It is a bitter deputy .

Not so , not so : his life is parallel'd 
Even with the stroke and line of his great justice :
He doth with holy abstinence subdue 
That in himself which he spurs on his power 
To qualify in others : were he meal'd with that 
Which he corrects , then were he tyrannous ;
But this being so , he's just .

Now are they come .

This is a gentle provost : seldom when 
The steeled gaoler is the friend of men .

How now ! What noise ? That spirit's possess'd with haste 
That wounds the unsisting postern with these strokes .


There he must stay until the officer 
Arise to let him in ; he is call'd up .

Have you no countermand for Claudio yet ,
But he must die to-morrow ?

None , sir , none .

As near the dawning , provost , as it is ,
You shall hear more ere morning .

Happily 
You something know ; yet , I believe there comes 
No countermand : no such example have we .
Besides , upon the very siege of justice ,
Lord Angelo hath to the public ear 
Profess'd the contrary .

This is his lordship's man .

And here comes Claudio's pardon .

My lord hath sent you this note ; and by me this further charge , that you swerve not from the smallest article of it , neither in time , matter , or other circumstance . Good morrow ; for , as I take it , it is almost day .

I shall obey him .


This is his pardon , purchased by such sin 
For which the pardoner himself is in ;
Hence hath offence his quick celerity ,
When it is borne in high authority .
When vice makes mercy , mercy's so extended ,
That for the fault's love is the offender friended .
Now , sir , what news ?

I told you ; Lord Angelo , belike thinking me remiss in mine office , awakens me with this unwonted putting on ; methinks strangely , for he hath not used it before .

Pray you , let's hear .

Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary , let Claudio be executed by four of the clock ; and , in the afternoon , Barnardine . For my better satisfaction , let me have Claudio's head sent me by five . Let this be duly performed ; with a thought that more depends on it than we must yet deliver . Thus fail not to do your office , as you will answer it at your peril .
What say you to this , sir ?

What is that Barnardine who is to be executed this afternoon ?

A Bohemian born , but here nursed up and bred ; one that is a prisoner nine years old .

How came it that the absent duke had not either delivered him to his liberty or executed him ? I have heard it was ever his manner to do so .

His friends still wrought reprieves for him ; and , indeed , his fact , till now in the government of Lord Angelo , came not to an undoubtful proof .

It is now apparent ?

Most manifest , and not denied by himself .

Hath he borne himself penitently in prison ? How seems he to be touched ?

A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as a drunken sleep ; careless , reckless , and fearless of what's past , present , or to come ; insensible of mortality , and desperately mortal .

He wants advice .

He will hear none . He hath evermore had the liberty of the prison : give him leave to escape hence , he would not : drunk many times a day , if not many days entirely drunk . We have very oft awaked him , as if to carry him to execution , and showed him a seeming warrant for it : it hath not moved him at all .

More of him anon . There is written in your brow , provost , honesty and constancy ; if I read it not truly , my ancient skill beguiles me ; but , in the boldness of my cunning I will lay myself in hazard . Claudio , whom here you have warrant to execute , is no greater forfeit to the law than Angalo who hath sentenced him . To make you understand this in a manifested effect , I crave but four days' respite , for the which you are to do me both a present and a dangerous courtesy .

Pray , sir , in what ?

In the delaying death .

Alack ! how may I do it , having the hour limited , and an express command , under penalty , to deliver his head in the view of Angelo ? I may make my case as Claudio's to cross this in the smallest .

By the vow of mine order I warrant you , if my instructions may be your guide . Let this Barnardine be this morning executed , and his head borne to Angelo .

Angelo hath seen them both , and will discover the favour .

O ! death's a great disguiser , and you may add to it . Shave the head , and tie the beard ; and say it was the desire of the penitent to be so bared before his death : you know the course is common . If anything fall to you upon this , more than thanks and good fortune , by the saint whom I profess , I will plead against it with my life .

Pardon me , good father ; it is against my oath .

Were you sworn to the duke or to the deputy ?

To him , and to his substitutes .

You will think you have made no offence , if the duke avouch the justice of your dealing ?

But what likelihood is in that ?

Not a resemblance , but a certainty . Yet since I see you fearful , that neither my coat , integrity , nor persuasion can with ease attempt you , I will go further than I meant , to pluck all fears out of you . Look you , sir ; here is the hand and seal of the duke : you know the character , I doubt not , and the signet is not strange to you .

I know them both .

The contents of this is the return of the duke : you shall anon over-read if at your pleasure , where you shall find within these two days , he will be here . This is a thing that Angelo knows not , for he this very day receives letters of strange tenour ; perchance of the duke's death ; perchance , his entering into some monastery ; but , by chance , nothing of what is writ . Look , the unfolding star calls up the shepherd . Put not yourself into amazement how these things should be : all difficulties are but easy when they are known . Call your executioner , and off with Barnardine's head : I will give him a present shrift and advise him for a better place . Yet you are amaz'd , but this shall absolutely resolve you . Come away ; it is almost clear dawn .


I am as well acquainted here as I was in our house of profession : one would think it were Mistress Overdone's own house , for here be many of her old customers . First , here's young Master Rash ; he's in for a commodity of brown paper and old ginger , nine-score and seventeen pounds , of which he made five marks , ready money : marry , then ginger was not much in request , for the old women were all dead . Then is there here one Master Caper , at the suit of Master Three-pile the mercer , for some four suits of peach-colour'd satin , which now peaches him a beggar . Then have we young Dizy , and young Master Deep-vow , and Master Copperspur , and Master Starve-lackey the rapier and dagger man , and young Drop-heir that kill'd lusty Pudding , and Master Forthlight , the tilter , and brave Master Shoe-tie the great traveller , and wild Half-can that stabbed Pots , and , I think , forty more ; all great doers in our trade , and are now 'for the Lord's sake .' 


Sirrah , bring Barnardine hither .

Master Barnardine ! you must rise and be hanged , Master Barnardine .

What ho ! Barnardine !

A pox o' your throats !
Who makes that noise there ? What are you ?

Your friends , sir ; the hangman . You must be so good , sir , to rise and be put to death .

Away ! you rogue , away !
I am sleepy .

Tell him he must awake , and that quickly too .

Pray , Master Barnardine , awake till you are executed , and sleep afterwards .

Go in to him , and fetch him out .

He is coming , sir , he is coming ; I hear his straw rustle .

Is the axe upon the block , sirrah ?

Very ready , sir .


How now , Abhorson ! what's the news with you ?

Truly , sir , I would desire you to clap into your prayers ; for , look you , the warrant's come .

You rogue , I have been drinking all night ; I am not fitted for't .

O , the better , sir ; for he that drinks all night , and is hang'd betimes in the morning , may sleep the sounder all the next day .

Look you , sir ; here comes your ghostly father : do we jest now , think you ?


Sir , induced by my charity , and hearing how hastily you are to depart , I am come to advise you , comfort you , and pray with you .

Friar , not I : I have been drinking hard all night , and I will have more time to prepare me , or they shall beat out my brains with billets . I will not consent to die this day , that's certain .

O , sir , you must ; and therefore , I beseech you look forward on the journey you shall go .

I swear I will not die to-day for any man's persuasion .

But hear you .

Not a word : if you have anything to say to me , come to my ward ; for thence will not I to day .

Unfit to live or die . O , gravel heart !
After him fellows : bring him to the block .


Now , sir , how do you find the prisoner ?

A creature unprepar'd , unmeet for death ;
And , to transport him in the mind he is 
Were damnable .

Here in the prison , father ,
There died this morning of a cruel fever 
One Ragozine , a most notorious pirate ,
A man of Claudio's years ; his beard and head 
Just of his colour . What if we do omit 
This reprobate till he were well inclin'd ,
And satisfy the deputy with the visage 
Of Ragozine , more like to Claudio ?

O , 'tis an accident that heaven provides !
Dispatch it presently : the hour draws on 
Prefix'd by Angelo . See this be done ,
And sent according to command , whiles I 
Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die .

This shall be done , good father , presently .
But Barnardine must die this afternoon :
And how shall we continue Claudio ,
To save me from the danger that might come 
If he were known alive ?

Let this be done :
Put them in secret holds , both Barnardine and Claudio :
Ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting 
To the under generation , you shall find 
Your safety manifested .

I am your free dependant .

Quick , dispatch ,
And send the head to Angelo .

Now will I write letters to Angelo ,
The provost , he shall bear them ,whose contents 
Shall witness to him I am near at home ,
And that , by great injunctions , I am bound 
To enter publicly : him I'll desire 
To meet me at the consecrated fount 
A league below the city ; and from thence ,
By cold gradation and well-balanc'd form ,
We shall proceed with Angelo .


Here is the head ; I'll carry it myself .

Convenient is it . Make a swift return ,
For I would commune with you of such things 
That want no ear but yours .

I'll make all speed .


Peace , ho , be here !

The tongue of Isabel . She's come to know 
If yet her brother's pardon be come hither ;
But I will keep her ignorant of her good ,
To make her heavenly comforts of despair ,
When it is least expected .


Ho ! by your leave .

Good morning to you , fair and gracious daughter .

The better , given me by so holy a man .
Hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon ?

He hath releas'd him , Isabel , from the world :
His head is off and sent to Angelo .

Nay , but it is not so .

It is no other : show your wisdom , daughter ,
In your close patience .

O ! I will to him and pluck out his eyes !

You shall not be admitted to his sight .

Unhappy Claudio ! Wretched Isabel !
Injurious world ! Most damned Angelo !

This nor hurts him nor profits you a jot ;
Forbear it therefore ; give your cause to heaven .
Mark what I say , which you shall find 
By every syllable a faithful verity .
The duke comes home to-morrow ; nay , dry your eyes :
One of our covent , and his confessor ,
Gives me this instance : already he hath carried 
Notice to Escalus and Angelo ,
Who do prepare to meet him at the gates ,
There to give up their power . If you can , pace your wisdom 
In that good path that I would wish it go ,
And you shall have your bosom on this wretch ,
Grace of the Duke , revenges to your heart ,
And general honour .

I am directed by you .

This letter then to Friar Peter give ;
'Tis that he sent me of the duke's return :
Say , by this token , I desire his company 
At Mariana's house to-night . Her cause and yours ,
I'll perfect him withal , and he shall bring you 
Before the duke ; and to the head of Angelo 
Accuse him home , and home . For my poor self ,
I am combined by a sacred vow 
And shall be absent . Wend you with this letter .
Command these fretting waters from your eyes 
With a light heart : trust not my holy order ,
If I pervert your course . Who's here ?


Good even . Friar , where is the provost ?

Not within , sir .

O pretty Isabella , I am pale at mine heart to see thine eyes so red : thou must be patient . I am fain to dine and sup with water and bran ; I dare not for my head fill my belly ; one fruitful meal would set me to't . But they say the duke will be here to-morrow . By my troth , Isabel , I loved thy brother : if the old fantastical duke of dark corners had been at home , he had lived .


Sir , the duke is marvellous little beholding to your reports ; but the best is , he lives not in them .

Friar , thou knowest not the duke so well as I do : he's a better woodman than thou takest him for .

Well , you'll answer this one day .
Fare ye well .

Nay , tarry ; I'll go along with thee : I can tell thee pretty tales of the duke .

You have told me too many of him already , sir , if they be true ; if not true , none were enough .

I was once before him for getting a wench with child .

Did you such a thing ?

Yes , marry , did I ; but I was fain to forswear it : they would else have married me to the rotten medlar .

Sir , your company is fairer than honest .
Rest you well .

By my troth , I'll go with thee to the lane's end . If bawdy talk offend you , we'll have very little of it . Nay , friar , I am a kind of burr ; I shall stick .


Every letter he hath writ hath disvouched other .

In most uneven and distracted manner .
His actions show much like to madness : pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted ! And why meet him at the gates , and redeliver our authorities there ?

I guess not .

And why should we proclaim it in an hour before his entering , that if any crave redress of injustice , they should exhibit their petitions in the street ?

He shows his reason for that : to have a dispatch of complaints , and to deliver us from devices hereafter , which shall then have no power to stand against us .

Well , I beseech you , let it be proclaim'd :
Betimes i' the morn I'll call you at your house ;
Give notice to such men of sort and suit 
As are to meet him .

I shall , sir : fare you well .

Good night .

This deed unshapes me quite , makes me unpregnant 
And dull to all proceedings . A deflower'd maid ,
And by an eminent body that enforc'd 
The law against it ! But that her tender shame 
Will not proclaim against her maiden loss ,
How might she tongue me ! Yet reason dares her no :
For my authority bears so credent bulk ,
That no particular scandal once can touch :
But it confounds the breather . He should have liv'd ,
Save that his riotous youth , with dangerous sense ,
Might in the times to come have ta'en revenge ,
By so receiving a dishonour'd life 
With ransom of such shame . Would yet he had liv'd !
Alack ! when once our grace we have forgot ,
Nothing goes right : we would , and we would not .


These letters at fit time deliver me .

The provost knows our purpose and our plot .
The matter being afoot , keep your instruction ,
And hold you ever to our special drift ,
Though sometimes you do blench from this to that ,
As cause doth minister . Go call at Flavius' house ,
And tell him where I stay : give the like notice 
To Valentinus , Rowland , and to Crassus ,
And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate ;
But send me Flavius first .

It shall be speeded well .

I thank thee , Varrius ; thou hast made good haste .
Come , we will walk . There's other of our friends 
Will greet us here anon , my gentle Varrius .


To speak so indirectly I am loath :
I would say the truth ; but to accuse him so ,
That is your part : yet I'm advis'd to do it ;
He says , to veil full purpose .

Be rul'd by him .

Besides , he tells me that if peradventure 
He speak against me on the adverse side ,
I should not think it strange ; for 'tis a physic 
That's bitter to sweet end .

I would , Friar Peter 

O , peace ! the friar is come .


Come ; I have found you out a stand most fit ,
Where you may have such vantage on the duke ,
He shall not pass you . Twice have the trumpets sounded :
The generous and gravest citizens 
Have hent the gates , and very near upon 
The duke is ent'ring : therefore hence , away !

My very worthy cousin , fairly met !
Our old and faithful friend , we are glad to see you .

Happy return be to your royal Grace !

Happy return be to your royal Grace !

Many and hearty thankings to you both .
We have made inquiry of you ; and we hear 
Such goodness of your justice , that our soul 
Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks ,
Forerunning more requital .

You make my bonds still greater .

O ! your desert speaks loud ; and I should wrong it ,
To lock it in the wards of covert bosom ,
When it deserves , with characters of brass ,
A forted residence 'gainst the tooth of time 
And razure of oblivion . Give me your hand ,
And let the subject see , to make them know 
That outward courtesies would fain proclaim 
Favours that keep within . Come , Escalus ,
You must walk by us on our other hand ;
And good supporters are you .


Now is your time : speak loud and kneel before him .

Justice , O royal duke ! Vail your regard 
Upon a wrong'd , I'd fain have said , a maid !
O worthy prince ! dishonour not your eye 
By throwing it on any other object 
Till you have heard me in my true complaint 
And given me justice , justice , justice , justice !

Relate your wrongs : in what ? by whom ? Be brief ;
Here is Lord Angelo , shall give you justice :
Reveal yourself to him .

O worthy duke !
You bid me seek redemption of the devil .
Hear me yourself ; for that which I must speak 
Must either punish me , not being believ'd ,
Or wring redress from you . Hear me , O , hear me , here !

My lord , her wits , I fear me , are not firm :
She hath been a suitor to me for her brother 
Cut off by course of justice ,

By course of justice !

And she will speak most bitterly and strange .

Most strange , but yet most truly , will I speak .
That Angelo's forsworn , is it not strange ?
That Angelo's a murderer , is't not strange ?
That Angelo is an adulterous thief ,
A hypocrite , a virgin-violator ;
Is it not strange , and strange ?

Nay , it is ten times strange .

It is not truer he is Angelo 
Than this is all as true as it is strange ;
Nay , it is ten times true ; for truth is truth 
To the end of reckoning .

Away with her ! poor soul ,
She speaks this in the infirmity of sense .

O prince , I conjure thee , as thou believ'st 
There is another comfort than this world ,
That thou neglect me not , with that opinion 
That I am touch'd with madness . Make not impossible 
That which but seems unlike . 'Tis not impossible 
But one , the wicked'st caitiff on the ground ,
May seem as shy , as grave , as just , as absolute 
As Angelo ; even so may Angelo ,
In all his dressings , characts , titles , forms ,
Be an arch-villain . Believe it , royal prince :
If he be less , he's nothing ; but he's more ,
Had I more name for badness .

By mine honesty ,
If she be mad ,as I believe no other ,
Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense ,
Such a dependency of thing on thing ,
As e'er I heard in madness .

O gracious duke !
Harp not on that ; nor do not banish reason 
For inequality ; but let your reason serve 
To make the truth appear where it seems hid ,
And hide the false seems true .

Many that are not mad 
Have , sure , more lack of reason . What would you say ?

I am the sister of one Claudio ,
Condemn'd upon the act of fornication 
To lose his head ; condemn'd by Angelo .
I , in probation of a sisterhood ,
Was sent to by my brother ; one Lucio 
As then the messenger ,

That's I , an't like your Grace :
I came to her from Claudio , and desir'd her 
To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo 
For her poor brother's pardon .

That's he indeed .

You were not bid to speak .

No , my good lord ;
Nor wish'd to hold my peace .

I wish you now , then ;
Pray you , take note of it ; and when you have 
A business for yourself , pray heaven you then 
Be perfect .

I warrant your honour .

The warrant's for yourself : take heed to it .

This gentleman told somewhat of my tale ,

Right .

It may be right ; but you are in the wrong 
To speak before your time . Proceed .

I went 
To this pernicious caitiff deputy .

That's somewhat madly spoken .

Pardon it ;
The phrase is to the matter .

Mended again : the matter ; proceed .

In brief , to set the needless process by ,
How I persuaded , how I pray'd , and kneel'd ,
How he refell'd me , and how I replied ,
For this was of much length ,the vile conclusion 
I now begin with grief and shame to utter .
He would not , but by gift of my chaste body 
To his concupiscible intemperate lust ,
Release my brother ; and , after much debatement ,
My sisterly remorse confutes mine honour ,
And I did yield to him . But the next morn betimes ,
His purpose surfeiting , he sends a warrant 
For my poor brother's head .

This is most likely !

O , that it were as like as it is true !

By heaven , fond wretch ! thou know'st not what thou speak'st ,
Or else thou art suborn'd against his honour 
In hateful practice . First , his integrity 
Stands without blemish ; next , it imports no reason 
That with such vehemency he should pursue 
Faults proper to himself : if he had so offended ,
He would have weigh'd thy brother by himself ,
And not have cut him off . Some one hath set you on :
Confess the truth , and say by whose advice 
Thou cam'st here to complain .

And is this all ?
Then , O you blessed ministers above ,
Keep me in patience ; and , with ripen'd time 
Unfold the evil which is here wrapt up 
In countenance ! Heaven shield your Grace from woe ,
As I , thus wrong'd , hence unbelieved go !

I know you'd fain be gone . An officer !
To prison with her ! Shall we thus permit 
A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall 
On him so near us ? This needs must be a practice .
Who knew of your intent and coming hither ?

One that I would were here , Friar Lodowick .

A ghostly father , belike . Who knows that Lodowick ?

My lord , I know him ; 'tis a meddling friar ;
I do not like the man : had he been lay , my lord ,
For certain words he spake against your Grace 
In your retirement , I had swing'd him soundly .

Words against me ! This' a good friar , belike !
And to set on this wretched woman here 
Against our substitute ! Let this friar be found .

But yesternight , my lord , she and that friar ,
I saw them at the prison : a saucy friar ,
A very scurvy fellow .

Bless'd be your royal Grace !
I have stood by , my lord , and I have heard 
Your royal ear abus'd . First , hath this woman 
Most wrongfully accus'd your substitute ,
Who is as free from touch or soil with her ,
As she from one ungot .

We did believe no less .
Know you that Friar Lodowick that she speaks of ?

I know him for a man divine and holy ;
Not scurvy , nor a temporary meddler ,
As he's reported by this gentleman ;
And , on my trust , a man that never yet 
Did , as he vouches , misreport your Grace .

My lord , most villanously ; believe it .

Well ; he in time may come to clear himself ,
But at this instant he is sick , my lord ,
Of a strange fever . Upon his mere request ,
Being come to knowledge that there was complaint 
Intended 'gainst Lord Angelo , came I hither ,
To speak , as from his mouth , what he doth know 
Is true and false ; and what he with his oath 
And all probation will make up full clear ,
Whensoever he's convented . First , for this woman ,
To justify this worthy nobleman ,
So vulgarly and personally accus'd ,
Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes ,
Till she herself confess it .

Good friar , let's hear it .

Do you not smile at this , Lord Angelo ?
O heaven , the vanity of wretched fools !
Give us some seats . Come , cousin Angelo ;
In this I'll be impartial ; be you judge 
Of your own cause . Is this the witness , friar ?
First , let her show her face , and after speak .

Pardon , my lord ; I will not show my face 
Until my husband bid me .

What , are you married ?

No , my lord .

Are you a maid ?

No , my lord .

A widow , then ?

Neither , my lord .

Why , you 
Are nothing , then : neither maid , widow , nor wife ?

My lord , she may be a punk ; for many of them are neither maid , widow , nor wife .

Silence that fellow : I would he had some cause 
To prattle for himself .

Well , my lord .

My lord , I do confess I ne'er was married ;
And I confess besides I am no maid :
I have known my husband yet my husband knows not 
That ever he knew me .

He was drunk then my lord : it can be no better .

For the benefit of silence , would thou wert so too !

Well , my lord .

This is no witness for Lord Angelo .

Now I come to't , my lord :
She that accuses him of fornication ,
In self-same manner doth accuse my husband ;
And charges him , my lord , with such a time ,
When , I'll depose , I had him in mine arms ,
With all th' effect of love .

Charges she moe than me ?

Not that I know .

No ? you say your husband .

Why , just , my lord , and that is Angelo ,
Who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body 
But knows he thinks that he knows Isabel's .

This is a strange abuse . Let's see thy face .

My husband bids me ; now I will unmask .

This is that face , thou cruel Angelo ,
Which once thou swor'st was worth the looking on :
This is the hand which , with a vow'd contract ,
Was fast belock'd in thine : this is the body 
That took away the match from Isabel ,
And did supply thee at thy garden-house 
In her imagin'd person .

Know you this woman ?

Carnally , she says .

Sirrah , no more !

Enough , my lord .

My lord , I must confess I know this woman ;
And five years since there was some speech of marriage 
Betwixt myself and her , which was broke off ,
Partly for that her promised proportions 
Came short of composition ; but , in chief 
For that her reputation was disvalu'd 
In levity : since which time of five years 
I never spake with her , saw her , nor heard from her ,
Upon my faith and honour .

Noble prince ,
As there comes light from heaven and words from breath ,
As there is sense in truth and truth in virtue ,
I am affianc'd this man's wife as strongly 
As words could make up vows : and , my good lord ,
But Tuesday night last gone in 's garden-house 
He knew me as a wife . As this is true ,
Let me in safety raise me from my knees 
Or else for ever be confixed here ,
A marble monument .

I did but smile till now :
Now , good my lord , give me the scope of justice ;
My patience here is touch'd . I do perceive 
These poor informal women are no more 
But instruments of some more mightier member 
That sets them on . Let me have way , my lord ,
To find this practice out .

Ay , with my heart ;
And punish them unto your height of pleasure .
Thou foolish friar , and thou pernicious woman ,
Compact with her that's gone , think'st thou thy oaths ,
Though they would swear down each particular saint ,
Were testimonies against his worth and credit 
That's seal'd in approbation ? You , Lord Escalus ,
Sit with my cousin ; lend him your kind pains 
To find out this abuse , whence 'tis deriv'd .
There is another friar that set them on ;
Let him be sent for .

Would he were here , my lord ; for he indeed 
Hath set the women on to this complaint :
Your provost knows the place where he abides 
And he may fetch him .

Go do it instantly .

And you , my noble and well-warranted cousin ,
Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth ,
Do with your injuries as seems you best ,
In any chastisement : I for awhile will leave you ;
But stir not you , till you have well determin'd 
Upon these slanderers .

My lord , we'll do it throughly .

Signior Lucio , did not you say you knew that 
Friar Lodowick to be a dishonest person ?

Cucullus non facit monachum : honest in nothing , but in his clothes ; and one that hath spoke most villanous speeches of the duke .

We shall entreat you to abide here till he come and enforce them against him . We shall find this friar a notable fellow .

As any in Vienna , on my word .

Call that same Isabel here once again :
I would speak with her .


Pray you , my lord , give me leave to question ; you shall see how I'll handle her .

Not better than he , by her own report .

Say you ?

Marry , sir , I think , if you handled her privately , she would sooner confess : perchance , publicly , she'll be ashamed .

I will go darkly to work with her .

That's the way : for women are light at midnight .


Come on , mistress : here's a gentlewoman denies all that you have said .

My lord , here comes the rascal I spoke of ; here with the provost .

In very good time : speak not you to him , till we call upon you .


Mum .

Come , sir . Did you set these women on to slander Lord Angelo ? they have confessed you did .

'Tis false .

How ! know you where you are ?

Respect to your great place ! and let the devil 
Be sometime honour'd for his burning throne .
Where is the duke ? 'tis he should hear me speak .

The duke's in us , and we will hear you speak :
Look you speak justly .

Boldly , at least . But , O , poor souls !
Come you to seek the lamb here of the fox ?
Good night to your redress ! Is the duke gone ?
Then is your cause gone too . The duke's unjust ,
Thus to retort your manifest appeal ,
And put your trial in the villain's mouth 
Which here you come to accuse .

This is the rascal : this is he I spoke of .

Why , thou unreverend and unhallow'd friar !
Is't not enough thou hast suborn'd these women 
To accuse this worthy man , but , in foul mouth ,
And in the witness of his proper ear ,
To call him villain ?
And then to glance from him to the duke himself .
To tax him with injustice ? take him hence ;
To the rack with him ! We'll touse you joint by joint ,
But we will know his purpose . What ! 'unjust' ?

Be not so hot ; the duke 
Dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he 
Dare rack his own : his subject am I not ,
Nor here provincial . My business in this state 
Made me a looker-on here in Vienna ,
Where I have seen corruption boil and bubble 
Till it o'er-run the stew : laws for all faults ,
But faults so countenanc'd , that the strong statutes 
Stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop ,
As much in mock as mark .

Slander to the state ! Away with him to prison !

What can you vouch against him , Signior Lucio ?
Is this the man that you did tell us of ?

'Tis he , my lord . Come hither , goodman bald-pate : do you know me ?

I remember you , sir , by the sound of your voice : I met you at the prison , in the absence of the duke .

O ! did you so ? And do you remember what you said of the duke ?

Most notedly , sir .

Do you so , sir ? And was the duke a flesh-monger , a fool , and a coward , as you then reported him to be ?

You must , sir , change persons with me , ere you make that my report : you , indeed , spoke so of him ; and much more , much worse .

O thou damnable fellow ! Did not I pluck thee by the nose for thy speeches ?

I protest I love the duke as I love myself .

Hark how the villain would close now , after his treasonable abuses !

Such a fellow is not to be talk'd withal .
Away with him to prison ! Where is the provost ?
Away with him to prison ! Lay bolts enough on him , let him speak no more . Away with those giglots too , and with the other confederate companion !


Stay , sir ; stay awhile .

What ! resists he ? Help him , Lucio .

Come , sir ; come , sir ; come , sir ; foh ! sir . Why , you bald-pated , lying rascal , you must be hooded , must you ? show your knave's visage , with a pox to you ! show your sheepbiting face , and be hanged an hour ! Will't not off ?


Thou art the first knave that e'er made a duke .
First , provost , let me bail these gentle three .


Sneak not away , sir ; for the friar and you 
Must have a word anon . Lay hold on him .

This may prove worse than hanging .

What you have spoke I pardon ; sit you down :
We'll borrow place of him .

Sir , by your leave .
Hast thou or word , or wit , or impudence ,
That yet can do thee office ? If thou hast ,
Rely upon it till my tale be heard ,
And hold no longer out .

O my dread lord !
I should be guiltier than my guiltiness ,
To think I can be undiscernible 
When I perceive your Grace , like power divine ,
Hath look'd upon my passes . Then , good prince ,
No longer session hold upon my shame ,
But let my trial be mine own confession :
Immediate sentence then and sequent death 
Is all the grace I beg .

Come hither , Mariana ,
Say , wast thou e'er contracted to this woman ?

I was , my lord .

Go take her hence , and marry her instantly .
Do you the office , friar ; which consummate ,
Return him here again . Go with him , provost .


My lord , I am more amaz'd at his dishonour 
Than at the strangeness of it .

Come hither , Isabel .
Your friar is now your prince : as I was then 
Advertising and holy to your business ,
Not changing heart with habit , I am still 
Attorney'd at your service .

O , give me pardon ,
That I , your vassal , have employ'd and pain'd 
Your unknown sovereignty !

You are pardon'd , Isabel :
And now , dear maid , be you as free to us .
Your brother's death , I know , sits at your heart ;
And you may marvel why I obscur'd myself ,
Labouring to save his life , and would not rather 
Make rash remonstrance of my hidden power 
Than let him so be lost . O most kind maid !
It was the swift celerity of his death ,
Which I did think with slower foot came on ,
That brain'd my purpose : but , peace be with him !
That life is better life , past fearing death ,
Than that which lives to fear : make it your comfort ,
So happy is your brother .

I do , my lord .


For this new-married man approaching here ,
Whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd 
Your well-defended honour , you must pardon 
For Mariana's sake . But as he adjudg'd your brother ,
Being criminal , in double violation 
Of sacred chastity , and of promise-breach ,
Thereon dependent , for your brother's life ,
The very mercy of the law cries out 
Most audible , even from his proper tongue ,
'An Angelo for Claudio , death for death !' 
Haste still pays haste , and leisure answers leisure ,
Like doth quit like , and Measure still for Measure .
Then , Angelo , thy fault's thus manifested ,
Which , though thou wouldst deny , denies thee vantage .
We do condemn thee to the very block 
Where Claudio stoop'd to death , and with like haste .
Away with him !

O , my most gracious lord !
I hope you will not mock me with a husband .

It is your husband mock'd you with a husband .
Consenting to the safeguard of your honour ,
I thought your marriage fit ; else imputation ,
For that he knew you , might reproach your life 
And choke your good to come . For his possessions ,
Although by confiscation they are ours ,
We do instate and widow you withal ,
To buy you a better husband .

O my dear lord !
I crave no other , nor no better man .

Never crave him ; we are definitive .

Gentle my liege ,

You do but lose your labour .
Away with him to death !

Now , sir , to you .

O my good lord ! Sweet Isabel , take my part :
Lend me your knees , and , all my life to come ,
I'll lend you all my life to do you service ,

Against all sense you do importune her :
Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact ,
Her brother's ghost his paved bed would break ,
And take her hence in horror .

Isabel ,
Sweet Isabel , do yet but kneel by me :
Hold up your hands , say nothing , I'll speak all .
They say best men are moulded out of faults ,
And , for the most , become much more the better 
For being a little bad : so may my husband .
O , Isabel ! will you not lend a knee ?

He dies for Claudio's death .

Most bounteous sir ,
Look , if it please you , on this man condemn'd ,
As if my brother liv'd . I partly think 
A due sincerity govern'd his deeds ,
Till he did look on me : since it is so ,
Let him not die . My brother had but justice ,
In that he did the thing for which he died :
For Angelo ,
His act did not o'ertake his bad intent ;
And must be buried but as an intent 
That perish'd by the way . Thoughts are no subjects ;
Intents but merely thoughts .

Merely , my lord .

Your suit's unprofitable : stand up , I say .
I have bethought me of another fault .
Provost , how came it Claudio was beheaded 
At an unusual hour ?

It was commanded so .

Had you a special warrant for the deed ?

No , my good lord ; it was by private message .

For which I do discharge you of your office :
Give up your keys .

Pardon me , noble lord :
I thought it was a fault , but knew it not ,
Yet did repent me , after more advice ;
For testimony whereof , one in the prison ,
That should by private order else have died 
I have reserv'd alive .

What's he ?

His name is Barnardine .

I would thou hadst done so by Claudio .
Go , fetch him hither : let me look upon him .


I am sorry , one so learned and so wise 
As you , Lord Angelo , have still appear'd ,
Should slip so grossly , both in the heat of blood ,
And lack of temper'd judgment afterward .

I am sorry that such sorrow I procure ;
And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart 
That I crave death more willingly than mercy :
'Tis my deserving , and I do entreat it .


Which is that Barnardine ?

This , my lord .

There was a friar told me of this man .
Sirrah , thou art said to have a stubborn soul ,
That apprehends no further than this world ,
And squar'st thy life according . Thou'rt condemn'd :
But , for those earthly faults , I quit them all ,
And pray thee take this mercy to provide 
For better times to come . Friar , advise him :
I leave him to your hand .What muffled fellow's that ?

This is another prisoner that I sav'd ,
That should have died when Claudio lost his head ,
As like almost to Claudio as himself .


If he be like your brother , for his sake 
Is he pardon'd ; and , for your lovely sake 
Give me your hand and say you will be mine ,
He is my brother too . But fitter time for that .
By this , Lord Angelo perceives he's safe :
Methinks I see a quickening in his eye .
Well , Angelo , your evil quits you well :
Look that you love your wife ; her worth worth yours .
I find an apt remission in myself ,
And yet here's one in place I cannot pardon .


You , sirrah , that knew me for a fool , a coward ,
One all of luxury , an ass , a madman :
Wherein have I so deserv'd of you ,
That you extol me thus ?

'Faith , my lord , I spoke it but according to the trick . If you will hang me for it , you may ; but I had rather it would please you I might be whipped .

Whipp'd first , sir , and hang'd after .
Proclaim it , provost , round about the city ,
If any woman's wrong'd by this lewd fellow ,
As I have heard him swear himself there's one 
Whom he begot with child , let her appear ,
And he shall marry her : the nuptial finish'd ,
Let him be whipp'd and hang'd .

I beseech your highness , do not marry me to a whore . Your highness said even now , I made you a duke : good my lord , do not recompense me in making me a cuckold .

Upon mine honour , thou shalt marry her .
Thy slanders I forgive ; and therewithal 
Remit thy other forfeits . Take him to prison ,
And see our pleasure herein executed .

Marrying a punk , my lord , is pressing to death , whipping , and hanging .

Slandering a prince deserves it .
She , Claudio , that you wrong'd , look you restore .
Joy to you , Mariana ! love her , Angelo :
I have confess'd her and I know her virtue .
Thanks , good friend Escalus , for thy much goodness :
There's more behind that is more gratulate .
Thanks , provost , for thy care and secrecy ;
We shall employ thee in a worthier place .
Forgive him , Angelo , that brought you home 
The head of Ragozine for Claudio's :
The offence pardons itself . Dear Isabel ,
I have a motion much imports your good ;
Whereto if you'll a willing ear incline ,
What's mine is yours , and what is yours is mine .
So , bring us to our palace ; where we'll show 
What's yet behind , that's meet you all should know .

MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING

I learn in this letter that Don Pedro of Arragon comes this night to Messina .

He is very near by this : he was not three leagues off when I left him .

How many gentlemen have you lost in this action ?

But few of any sort , and none of name .

A victory is twice itself when the achiever brings home full numbers . I find here that Don Pedro hath bestowed much honour on a young Florentine called Claudio .

Much deserved on his part and equally remembered by Don Pedro . He hath borne himself beyond the promise of his age , doing in the figure of a lamb the feats of a lion : he hath indeed better bettered expectation than you must expect of me to tell you how .

He hath an uncle here in Messina will be very much glad of it .

I have already delivered him letters , and there appears much joy in him ; even so much that joy could not show itself modest enough without a badge of bitterness .

Did he break out into tears ?

In great measure .

A kind overflow of kindness . There are no faces truer than those that are so washed : how much better is it to weep at joy than to joy at weeping !

I pray you is Signior Mountanto returned from the wars or no ?

I know none of that name , lady : there was none such in the army of any sort .

What is he that you ask for , niece ?

My cousin means Signior Benedick of Padua .

O ! he is returned , and as pleasant as ever he was .

He set up his bills here in Messina and challenged Cupid at the flight ; and my uncle's fool , reading the challenge , subscribed for Cupid , and challenged him at the bird-bolt . I pray you , how many hath he killed and eaten in these wars ? But how many hath he killed ? for , indeed , I promised to eat all of his killing .

Faith , niece , you tax Signior Benedick too much ; but he'll be meet with you , I doubt it not .

He hath done good service , lady , in these wars .

You had musty victual , and he hath holp to eat it : he is a very valiant trencherman ; he hath an excellent stomach .

And a good soldier too , lady .

And a good soldier to a lady ; but what is he to a lord ?

A lord to a lord , a man to a man , stuffed with all honourable virtues .

It is so , indeed ; he is no less than a stuffed man ; but for the stuffing ,well , we are all mortal .

You must not , sir , mistake my niece There is a kind of merry war betwixt Signior Benedick and her : they never meet but there's a skirmish of wit between them .

Alas ! he gets nothing by that . In our last conflict four of his five wits went halting off , and now is the whole man governed with one ! so that if he have wit enough to keep himself warm , let him bear it for a difference between himself and his horse ; for it is all the wealth that he hath left to be known a reasonable creature . Who is his companion now ? He hath every month a new sworn brother .

Is't possible ?

Very easily possible : he wears his faith but as the fashion of his hat ; it ever changes with the next block .

I see , lady , the gentleman is not in your books .

No ; an he were , I would burn my study . But , I pray you , who is his companion ? Is there no young squarer now that will make a voyage with him to the devil ?

He is most in the company of the right noble Claudio .

O Lord ! he will hang upon him like a disease : he is sooner caught than the pestilence , and the taker runs presently mad . God help the noble Claudio ! if he have caught the Benedick , it will cost him a thousand pound ere a' be cured .

I will hold friends with you , lady .

Do , good friend .

You will never run mad , niece .

No , not till a hot January .

Don Pedro is approached .


Good Signior Leonato , you are come to meet your trouble : the fashion of the world is to avoid cost , and you encounter it .

Never came trouble to my house in the likeness of your Grace , for trouble being gone , comfort should remain ; but when you depart from me , sorrow abides and happiness takes his leave .

You embrace your charge too willingly . I think this is your daughter .

Her mother hath many times told me so .

Were you in doubt , sir , that you asked her ?

Signior Benedick , no ; for then you were a child .

You have it full , Benedick : we may guess by this what you are , being a man . Truly , the lady fathers herself . Be happy , lady , for you are like an honourable father .

If Signior Leonato be her father , she would not have his head on her shoulders for all Messina , as like him as she is .

I wonder that you will still be talking , Signior Benedick : nobody marks you .

What ! my dear Lady Disdain , are you yet living ?

Is it possible Disdain should die while she hath such meet food to feed it as Signior Benedick ? Courtesy itself must convert to disdain , if you come in her presence .

Then is courtesy a turncoat . But it is certain I am loved of all ladies , only you excepted ; and I would I could find in my heart that I had not a hard heart ; for , truly , I love none .

A dear happiness to women : they would else have been troubled with a pernicious suitor . I thank God and my cold blood , I am of your humour for that : I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow than a man swear he loves me .

God keep your ladyship still in that mind ; so some gentleman or other shall scape a predestinate scratched face .

Scratching could not make it worse , an 'twere such a face as yours were .

Well , you are a rare parrot-teacher .

A bird of my tongue is better than a beast of yours .

I would my horse had the speed of your tongue , and so good a continuer . But keep your way , i' God's name ; I have done .

You always end with a jade's trick : I know you of old .

This is the sum of all , Leonato : Signior Claudio , and Signior Benedick , my dear friend Leonato hath invited you all . I tell him we shall stay here at the least a month , and he heartily prays some occasion may detain us longer : I dare swear he is no hypocrite , but prays from his heart .

If you swear , my lord , you shall not be forsworn .

Let me bid you welcome , my lord : being reconciled to the prince your brother , I owe you all duty .

I thank you : I am not of many words , but I thank you .

Please it your Grace lead on ?

Your hand , Leonato ; we will go together .


Benedick , didst thou note the daughter of Signior Leonato ?

I noted her not ; but I looked on her .

Is she not a modest young lady ?

Do you question me , as an honest man should do , for my simple true judgment ; or would you have me speak after my custom , as being a professed tyrant to their sex ?

No ; I pray thee speak in sober judgment .

Why , i' faith , methinks she's too low for a high praise , too brown for a fair praise , and too little for a great praise : only this commendation I can afford her , that were she other than she is , she were unhandsome , and being no other but as she is , I do not like her .

Thou thinkest I am in sport : I pray thee tell me truly how thou likest her .

Would you buy her , that you inquire after her ?

Can the world buy such a jewel ?

Yea , and a case to put it into . But speak you this with a sad brow , or do you play the flouting Jack , to tell us Cupid is a good hare-finder , and Vulcan a rare carpenter ? Come , in what key shall a man take you , to go in the song ?

In mine eye she is the sweetest lady that ever I looked on .

I can see yet without spectacles and I see no such matter : there's her cousin an she were not possessed with a fury , exceeds her as much in beauty as the first of May doth the last of December . But I hope you have no intent to turn husband , have you ?

I would scarce trust myself , though I had sworn to the contrary , if Hero would be my wife .

Is't come to this , i' faith ? Hath not the world one man but he will wear his cap with suspicion ? Shall I never see a bachelor of three-score again ? Go to , i' faith ; an thou wilt needs thrust thy neck into a yoke , wear the print of it , and sigh away Sundays . Look ! Don Pedro is returned to seek you .


What secret hath held you here , that you followed not to Leonato's ?

I would your Grace would constrain me to tell .

I charge thee on thy allegiance .

You hear , Count Claudio : I can be secret as a dumb man ; I would have you think so ; but on my allegiance , mark you this , on my allegiance : he is in love . With who ? now that is your Grace's part . Mark how short his answer is : with Hero , Leonato's short daughter .

If this were so , so were it uttered .

Like the old tale , my lord : 'it is not so , nor 'twas not so ; but , indeed , God forbid it should be so .' 

If my passion change not shortly , God forbid it should be otherwise .

Amen , if you love her ; for the lady is very well worthy .

You speak this to fetch me in , my lord .

By my troth , I speak my thought .

And in faith , my lord , I spoke mine .

And by my two faiths and troths , my lord , I spoke mine .

That I love her , I feel .

That she is worthy , I know .

That I neither feel how she should be loved nor know how she should be worthy , is the opinion that fire cannot melt out of me : I will die in it at the stake .

Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite of beauty .

And never could maintain his part but in the force of his will .

That a woman conceived me , I thank her ; that she brought me up , I likewise give her most humble thanks : but that I will have a recheat winded in my forehead , or hang my bugle in an invisible baldrick , all women shall pardon me . Because I will not do them the wrong to mistrust any , I will do myself the right to trust none ; and the fine is ,for the which I may go the finer ,I will live a bachelor .

I shall see thee , ere I die , look pale with love .

With anger , with sickness , or with hunger , my lord ; not with love : prove that ever I lose more blood with love than I will get again with drinking , pick out mine eyes with a ballad-maker's pen , and hang me up at the door of a brothel-house for the sign of blind Cupid .

Well , if ever thou dost fall from this faith , thou wilt prove a notable argument .

If I do , hang me in a bottle like a cat and shoot at me ; and he that hits me , let him be clapped on the shoulder , and called Adam .

Well , as time shall try :
'In time the savage bull doth bear the yoke .' 

The savage bull may ; but if ever the sensible Benedick bear it , pluck off the bull's horns and set them in my forehead ; and let me be vilely painted , and in such great letters as they write , 'Here is good horse to hire ,' let them signify under my sign 'Here you may see Benedick the married man .' 

If this should ever happen , thou wouldst be horn-mad .

Nay , if Cupid have not spent all his quiver in Venice , thou wilt quake for this shortly .

I look for an earthquake too then .

Well , you will temporize with the hours . In the meantime , good Signior Benedick , repair to Leonato's : commend me to him and tell him I will not fail him at supper ; for indeed he hath made great preparation .

I have almost matter enough in me for such an embassage ; and so I commit you 

To the tuition of God : from my house , if I had it ,

The sixth of July : your loving friend , Benedick .

Nay , mock not , mock not . The body of your discourse is sometime guarded with fragments , and the guards are but slightly basted on neither : ere you flout old ends any further , examine your conscience : and so I leave you .


My liege , your highness now may do me good .

My love is thine to teach : teach it but how ,
And thou shalt see how apt it is to learn 
Any hard lesson that may do thee good .

Hath Leonato any son , my lord ?

No child but Hero ; she's his only heir .
Dost thou affect her , Claudio ?

O ! my lord ,
When you went onward on this ended action ,
I looked upon her with a soldier's eye ,
That lik'd , but had a rougher task in hand 
Than to drive liking to the name of love ;
But now I am return'd , and that war-thoughts 
Have left their places vacant , in their rooms 
Come thronging soft and delicate desires ,
All prompting me how fair young Hero is ,
Saying , I lik'd her ere I went to wars .

Thou wilt be like a lover presently ,
And tire the hearer with a book of words .
If thou dost love fair Hero , cherish it ,
And I will break with her , and with her father ,
And thou shalt have her . Was't not to this end 
That thou began'st to twist so fine a story ?

How sweetly do you minister to love ,
That know love's grief by his complexion !
But lest my liking might too sudden seem ,
I would have salv'd it with a longer treatise .

What need the bridge much broader than the flood ?
The fairest grant is the necessity .
Look , what will serve is fit : 'tis once , thou lov'st ,
And I will fit thee with the remedy .
I know we shall have revelling to-night :
I will assume thy part in some disguise ,
And tell fair Hero I am Claudio ;
And in her bosom I'll unclasp my heart ,
And take her hearing prisoner with the force 
And strong encounter of my amorous tale :
Then , after to her father will I break ;
And the conclusion is , she shall be thine .
In practice let us put it presently .


How now , brother ! Where is my cousin , your son ? Hath he provided this music ?

He is very busy about it . But , brother , I can tell you strange news that you yet dreaint not of .

Are they good ?

As the event stamps them : but they have a good cover ; they show well outward . The prince and Count Claudio , walking in a thick-pleached alley in my orchard , were thus much overheard by a man of mine : the prince discovered to Claudio that he loved my niece your daughter , and meant to acknowledge it this night in a dance ; and , if he found her accordant , he meant to take the present time by the top and instantly break with you of it .

Hath the fellow any wit that told you this ?

A good sharp fellow : I will send for him ; and question him yourself .

No , no ; we will hold it as a dream till it appear itself : but I will acquaint my daughter withal , that she may be the better prepared for an answer , if peradventure this be true . Go you , and tell her of it .

Cousins , you know what you have to do . O ! I cry you mercy , friend ; go you with me , and I will use your skill . Good cousin , have a care this busy time .


What the good-year , my lord ! why are you thus out of measure sad ?

There is no measure in the occasion that breeds ; therefore the sadness is without limit .

You should hear reason .

And when I have heard it , what blessing brings it ?

It not a present remedy , at least a patient sufferance .

I wonder that thou , being ,as thou say'st thou art ,born under Saturn , goest about to apply a moral medicine to a mortifying mischief . I cannot hide what I am : I must be sad when I have cause , and smile at no man's jests ; eat when I have stomach , and wait for no man's leisure ; sleep when I am drowsy , and tend on no man's business ; laugh when I am merry , and claw no man in his humour .

Yea ; but you must not make the full show of this till you may do it without controlment . You have of late stood out against your brother , and he hath ta'en you newly into his grace ; where it is impossible you should take true root but by the fair weather that you make yourself : it is needful that you frame the season for your own harvest .

I had rather be a canker in a hedge than a rose in his grace ; and it better fits my blood to be disdained of all than to fashion a carriage to rob love from any : in this , though I cannot be said to be a flattering honest man , it must not be denied but I am a plain-dealing villain . I am trusted with a muzzle and enfranchised with a clog ; therefore I have decreed not to sing in my cage . If I had my mouth , I would bite ; if I had my liberty , I would do my liking : in the meantime , let me be that I am , and seek not to alter me .

Can you make no use of your discontent ?

I make all use of it , for I use it only . Who comes here ?

What news , Borachio ?

I came yonder from a great supper : the prince , your brother , is royally entertained by Leonato ; and I can give you intelligence of an intended marriage .

Will it serve for any model to build mischief on ? What is he for a fool that betroths himself to unquietness ?

Marry , it is your brother's right hand .

Who ? the most exquisite Claudio ?

Even he .

A proper squire ! And who , and who ? which way looks he ?

Marry , on Hero , the daughter and heir of Leonato .

A very forward March-chick ! How came you to this ?

Being entertained for a perfumer , as I was smoking a musty room , comes me the prince and Claudio , hand in hand , in sad conference : I whipt me behind the arras , and there heard it agreed upon that the prince should woo Hero for himself , and having obtained her , give her to Count Claudio .

Come , come ; let us thither : this may prove food to my displeasure . That young start-up hath all the glory of my overthrow : if I can cross him any way , I bless myself every way . You are both sure , and will assist me ?

To the death , my lord .

To the death , my lord .

Let us to the great supper : their cheer is the greater that I am subdued . Would the cook were of my mind ! Shall we go prove what's to be done ?

We'll wait upon your lordship .

Was not Count John here at supper ?

I saw him not .

How tartly that gentleman looks ! I never can see him but I am heart-burned an hour after .

He is of a very melancholy disposition .

He were an excellent man that were made just in the mid-way between him and Benedick : the one is too like an image , and says nothing ; and the other too like my lady's eldest son , evermore tattling .

Then half Signior Benedick's tongue in Count John's mouth , and half Count John's melancholy in Signior Benedick's face ,

With a good leg and a good foot , uncle , and money enough in his purse , such a man would win any woman in the world , if a' could get her good will .

By my troth , niece , thou wilt never get thee a husband , if thou be so shrewd of thy tongue .

In faith , she's too curst .

Too curst is more than curst : I shall lessen God's sending that way ; for it is said , 'God sends a curst cow short horns ;' but to a cow too curst he sends none .

So , by being too curst , God will send you no horns ?

Just , if he send me no husband ; for the which blessing I am at him upon my knees every morning and evening . Lord ! I could not endure a husband with a beard on his face : I had rather lie in the woollen .

You may light on a husband that hath no beard .

What should I do with him ? dress him in my apparel and make him my waiting-gentlewoman ? He that hath a beard is more than a youth , and he that hath no beard is less than a man ; and he that is more than a youth is not for me ; and he that is less than a man , I am not for him : therefore I will even take sixpence in earnest of the bear-ward , and lead his apes into hell .

Well then , go you into hell ?

No ; but to the gate ; and there will the devil meet me , like an old cuckold , with horns on his head , and say , 'Get you to heaven , Beatrice , get you to heaven ; here's no place for you maids :' so deliver I up my apes , and away to Saint Peter for the heavens ; he shows me where the bachelors sit , and there live we as merry as the day is long .

Well , niece , I trust you will be ruled by your father .

Yes , faith ; it is my cousin's duty to make curtsy , and say , 'Father , as it please you :' but yet for all that , cousin , let him be a handsome fellow , or else make another curtsy , and say , 'Father , as it please me .' 

Well , niece , I hope to see you one day fitted with a husband .

Not till God make men of some other metal than earth . Would it not grieve a woman to be over-mastered with a piece of valiant dust ? to make an account of her life to a clod of wayward marl ? No , uncle , I'll none : Adam's sons are my brethren ; and truly , I hold it a sin to match in my kindred .

Daughter , remember what I told you : if the prince do solicit you in that kind , you know your answer .

The fault will be in the music , cousin , if you be not wooed in good time : if the prince be too important , tell him there is measure in everything , and so dance out the answer . For , hear me , Hero : wooing , wedding , and repenting , is as a Scotch jig , a measure , and a cinque-pace : the first suit is hot and hasty , like a Scotch jig , and full as fantastical ; the wedding , mannerly-modest , as a measure , full of state and ancientry ; and then comes Repentance , and , with his bad legs , falls into the cinque-pace faster and faster , till he sink into his grave .

Cousin , you apprehend passing shrewdly .

I have a good eye , uncle : I can see a church by daylight .

The revellers are entering , brother : make good room .

Lady , will you walk about with your friend ?

So you walk softly and look sweetly and say nothing , I am yours for the walk ; and especially when I walk away .

With me in your company ?

I may say so , when I please .

And when please you to say so ?

When I like your favour ; for God defend the lute should be like the case !

My visor is Philemon's roof ; within the house is Jove .

Why , then , your visor should be thatch'd .

Speak low , if you speak love .


Well , I would you did like me .

So would not I , for your own sake ; for I have many ill qualities .

Which is one ?

I say my prayers aloud .

I love you the better ; the hearers may cry Amen .

God match me with a good dancer !

Amen .

And God keep him out of my sight when the dance is done ! Answer , clerk .

No more words : the clerk is answered .

I know you well enough : you are Signior Antonio .

At a word , I am not .

I know you by the waggling of your head .

To tell you true , I counterfeit him .

You could never do him so ill-well , unless you were the very man . Here's his dry hand up and down : you are he , you are he .

At a word , I am not .

Come , come ; do you think I do not know you by your excellent wit ? Can virtue hide itself ? Go to , mum , you are he : graces will appear , and there's an end .

Will you not tell me who told you so ?

No , you shall pardon me .

Nor will you not tell me who you are ?

Not now .

That I was disdainful , and that I had my good wit out of the 'Hundred Merry Tales .' Well , this was Signior Benedick that said so .

What's he ?

I am sure you know him well enough .

Not I , believe me .

Did he never make you laugh ?

I pray you , what is he ?

Why , he is the prince's jester : a very dull fool ; only his gift is in devising impossible slanders : none but libertines delight in him ; and the commendation is not in his wit , but in his villany ; for he both pleases men and angers them , and then they laugh at him and beat him . I am sure he is in the fleet : I would he had boarded me !

When I know the gentleman , I'll tell him what you say .

Do , do : he'll but break a comparison or two on me ; which , peradventure not marked or not laughed at , strikes him into melancholy ; and then there's a partridge wing saved , for the fool will eat no supper that night .

We must follow the leaders .

In every good thing .

Nay , if they lead to any ill , I will leave them at the next turning .


Sure my brother is amorous on Hero , and hath withdrawn her father to break with him about it . The ladies follow her and but one visor remains .

And that is Claudio : I know him by his bearing .

Are you not Signior Benedick ?

You know me well ; I am he .

Signior , you are very near my brother in his love : he is enamoured on Hero ; I pray you , dissuade him from her ; she is no equal for his birth : you may do the part of an honest man in it .

How know you he loves her ?

I heard him swear his affection .

So did I too ; and he swore he would marry her to-night .

Come , let us to the banquet .


Thus answer I in name of Benedick ,
But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio .
'Tis certain so ; the prince woos for himself .
Friendship is constant in all other things 
Save in the office and affairs of love :
Therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues ;
Let every eye negotiate for itself 
And trust no agent ; for beauty is a witch 
Against whose charms faith melteth into blood .
This is an accident of hourly proof ,
Which I mistrusted not . Farewell , therefore , Hero !


Count Claudio ?

Yea , the same .

Come , will you go with me ?

Whither ?

Even to the next willow , about your own business , count . What fashion will you wear the garland of ? About your neck , like a usurer's chain ? or under your arm , like a lieutenant's scarf ? You must wear it one way , for the prince hath got your Hero .

I wish him joy of her .

Why , that's spoken like an honest drovier : so they sell bullocks . But did you think the prince would have served you thus ?

I pray you , leave me .

Ho ! now you strike like the blind man : 'twas the boy that stole your meat , and you'll beat the post .

If it will not be , I'll leave you .


Alas ! poor hurt fowl . Now will he creep into sedges . But , that my lady Beatrice should know me , and not know me ! The prince's fool ! Ha ! it may be I go under that title because I am merry . Yea , but so I am apt to do myself wrong ; I am not so reputed : it is the base though bitter disposition of Beatrice that puts the world into her person , and so gives me out . Well , I'll be revenged as I may .


Now , signior , where's the count ? Did you see him ?

Troth , my lord , I have played the part of Lady Fame . I found him here as melancholy as a lodge in a warren . I told him , and I think I told him true , that your Grace had got the good will of this young lady ; and I offered him my company to a willow tree , either to make him a garland , as being forsaken , or to bind him up a rod , as being worthy to be whipped .

To be whipped ! What's his fault ?

The flat transgression of a school-boy , who , being overjoy'd with finding a bird's nest , shows it his companion , and he steals it .

Wilt thou make a trust a transgression ? The transgression is in the stealer .

Yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made , and the garland too ; for the garland he might have worn himself , and the rod he might have bestowed on you , who , as I take it , have stolen his bird's nest .

I will but teach them to sing , and restore them to the owner .

If their singing answer your saying , by my faith , you say honestly .

The Lady Beatrice hath a quarrel to you : the gentleman that danced with her told her she is much wronged by you .

O ! she misused me past the endurance of a block : an oak but with one green leaf on it , would have answered her : my very visor began to assume life and scold with her . She told me , not thinking I had been myself , that I was the prince's jester ; that I was duller than a great thaw ; huddling jest upon jest with such impossible conveyance upon me , that I stood like a man at a mark , with a whole army shooting at me . She speaks poniards , and every word stabs : if her breath were as terrible as her terminations , there were no living near her ; she would infect to the north star . I would not marry her , though she were endowed with all that Adam had left him before he transgressed : she would have made Hercules have turned spit , yea , and have cleft his club to make the fire too . Come , talk not of her ; you shall find her the infernal Ate in good apparel . I would to God some scholar would conjure her , for certainly , while she is here , a man may live as quiet in hell as in a sanctuary ; and people sin upon purpose because they would go thither ; so , indeed , all disquiet , horror and perturbation follow her .


Look ! here she comes .

Will your Grace command me any service to the world's end ? I will go on the slightest errand now to the Antipodes that you can devise to send me on ; I will fetch you a toothpicker now from the furthest inch of Asia ; bring you the length of Prester John's foot ; fetch you a hair off the Great Cham's beard ; do you any embassage to the Pigmies , rather than hold three words' conference with this harpy . You have no employment for me ?

None , but to desire your good company .

O God , sir , here's a dish I love not : I cannot endure my Lady Tongue .


Come , lady , come ; you have lost the heart of Signior Benedick .

Indeed , my lord , he lent it me awhile ; and I gave him use for it , a double heart for a single one : marry , once before he won it of me with false dice , therefore your Grace may well say I have lost it .

You have put him down , lady , you have put him down .

So I would not he should do me , my lord , lest I should prove the mother of fools . I have brought Count Claudio , whom you sent me to seek .

Why , how now , count ! wherefore are you sad ?

Not sad , my lord .

How then ? Sick ?

Neither , my lord .

The count is neither sad , nor sick , nor merry , nor well ; but civil count , civil as an orange , and something of that jealous complexion .

I' faith , lady , I think your blazon to be true ; though , I'll be sworn , if he be so , his conceit is false . Here , Claudio , I have wooed in thy name , and fair Hero is won ; I have broke with her father , and , his good will obtained ; name the day of marriage , and God give thee joy !

Count , take of me my daughter , and with her my fortunes : his Grace hath made the match , and all grace say Amen to it !

Speak , count , 'tis your cue .

Silence is the perfectest herald of joy : I were but little happy , if I could say how much . Lady , as you are mine , I am yours : I give away myself for you and dote upon the exchange .

Speak , cousin ; or , if you cannot , stop his mouth with a kiss , and let not him speak neither .

In faith , lady , you have a merry heart .

Yea , my lord ; I thank it , poor fool , it keeps on the windy side of care . My cousin tells him in his ear that he is in her heart .

And so she doth , cousin .

Good Lord , for alliance ! Thus goes every one to the world but I , and I am sunburnt . I may sit in a corner and cry heigh-ho for a husband !

Lady Beatrice , I will get you one .

I would rather have one of your father's getting . Hath your Grace ne'er a brother like you ? Your father got excellent husbands , if a maid could come by them .

Will you have me , lady ?

No , my lord , unless I might have another for working days : your Grace is too costly to wear every day . But , I beseech your Grace , pardon me ; I was born to speak all mirth and no matter .

Your silence most offends me , and to be merry best becomes you ; for , out of question , you were born in a merry hour .

No , sure , my lord , my mother cried ; but then there was a star danced , and under that was I born . Cousins , God give you joy !

Niece , will you look to those things I told you of ?

I cry you mercy , uncle . By your Grace's pardon .


By my troth , a pleasant-spirited lady .

There's little of the melancholy element in her , my lord : she is never sad but when she sleeps ; and not ever sad then , for I have heard my daughter say , she hath often dreamed of unhappiness and waked herself with laughing .

She cannot endure to hear tell of a husband .

O ! by no means : she mocks all her wooers out of suit .

She were an excellent wife for Benedick .

O Lord ! my lord , if they were but a week married , they would talk themselves mad .

Count Claudio , when mean you to go to church ?

To-morrow , my lord . Time goes on crutches till love have all his rites .

Not till Monday , my dear son , which is hence a just seven-night ; and a time too brief too , to have all things answer my mind .

Come , you shake the head at so long a breathing ; but , I warrant thee , Claudio , the time shall not go dully by us . I will in the interim undertake one of Hercules' labours , which is , to bring Signior Benedick and the Lady Beatrice into a mountain of affection the one with the other . I would fain have it a match ; and I doubt not but to fashion it , if you three will but minister such assistance as I shall give you direction .

My lord , I am for you , though it cost me ten nights' watchings .

And I , my lord .

And you too , gentle Hero ?

I will do any modest office , my lord , to help my cousin to a good husband .

And Benedick is not the unhopefullest husband that I know . Thus far can I praise him ; he is of a noble strain , of approved valour , and confirmed honesty . I will teach you how to humour your cousin , that she shall fall in love with Benedick ; and I , with your two helps , will so practise on Benedick that , in despite of his quick wit and his queasy stomach , he shall fall in love with Beatrice . If we can do this , Cupid is no longer an archer : his glory shall be ours , for we are the only love-gods . Go in with me , and I will tell you my drift .


It is so ; the Count Claudio shall marry the daughter of Leonato .

Yea , my lord ; but I can cross it .

Any bar , any cross , any impediment will be medicinable to me : I am sick in displeasure to him , and whatsoever comes athwart his affection ranges evenly with mine . How canst thou cross this marriage ?

Not honestly , my lord ; but so covertly that no dishonesty shall appear in me .

Show me briefly how .

I think I told your lordship , a year since , how much I am in the favour of Margaret , the waiting-gentlewoman to Hero .

I remember .

I can , at any unseasonable instant of the night , appoint her to look out at her lady's chamber-window .

What life is in that , to be the death of this marriage ?

The poison of that lies in you to temper . Go you to the prince your brother ; spare not to tell him , that he hath wronged his honour in marrying the renowned Claudio ,whose estimation do you mightily hold up ,to a contaminated stale , such a one as Hero .

What proof shall I make of that ?

Proof enough to misuse the prince , to vex Claudio , to undo Hero , and kill Leonato .
Look you for any other issue ?

Only to despite them , I will endeavour any thing .

Go , then ; find me a meet hour to draw Don Pedro and the Count Claudio alone : tell them that you know that Hero loves me ; intend a kind of zeal both to the prince and Claudio , as in love of your brother's honour , who hath made this match , and his friend's reputation , who is thus like to be cozened with the semblance of a maid ,that you have discovered thus . They will scarcely believe this without trial : offer them instances , which shall bear no less likelihood than to see me at her chamber-window , hear me call Margaret Hero ; hear Margaret term me Claudio ; and bring them to see this the very night before the intended wedding : for in the meantime I will so fashion the matter that Hero shall be absent ; and there shall appear such seeming truth of Hero's disloyalty , that jealousy shall be called assurance , and all the preparation overthrown .

Grow this to what adverse issue it can , I will put it in practice . Be cunning in the working this , and thy fee is a thousand ducats .

Be you constant in the accusation , and my cunning shall not shame me .

I will presently go learn their day of marriage .


Boy !


Signior ?

In my chamber-window lies a book ; bring it hither to me in the orchard .

I am here already , sir .

I know that ; but I would have thee hence , and here again . [Exit Boy .] I do much wonder that one man , seeing how much another man is a fool when he dedicates his behaviours to love , will , after he hath laughed at such shallow follies in others , become the argument of his own scorn by falling in love : and such a man is Claudio . I have known , when there was no music with him but the drum and the fife ; and now had he rather hear the tabor and the pipe : I have known , when he would have walked ten mile afoot to see a good armour ; and now will he lie ten nights awake , carving the fashion of a new doublet . He was wont to speak plain and to the purpose , like an honest man and a soldier ; and now is he turned orthographer ; his words are a very fantastical banquet , just so many strange dishes . May I be so converted , and see with these eyes ? I cannot tell ; I think not : I will not be sworn but love may transform me to an oyster ; but I'll take my oath on it , till he have made an oyster of me , he shall never make me such a fool . One woman is fair , yet I am well ; another is wise , yet I am well ; another virtuous , yet I am well ; but till all graces be in one woman , one woman shall not come in my grace . Rich she shall be , that's certain ; wise , or I'll none ; virtuous , or I'll never cheapen her ; fair , or I'll never look on her ; mild , or come not near me ; noble , or not I for an angel ; of good discourse , an excellent musician , and her hair shall be of what colour it please God . Ha ! the prince and Monsieur Love ! I will hide me in the arbour .

Come , shall we hear this music ?

Yea , my good lord . How still the evening is ,
As hush'd on purpose to grace harmony !

See you where Benedick hath hid himself ?

O ! very well , my lord : the music ended ,
We'll fit the kid-fox with a penny-worth .

Come , Balthazar , we'll hear that song again .

O ! good my lord , tax not so bad a voice 
To slander music any more than once .

It is the witness still of excellency ,
To put a strange face on his own perfection .
I pray thee , sing , and let me woo no more .

Because you talk of wooing , I will sing ;
Since many a wooer doth commence his suit 
To her he thinks not worthy ; yet he woos ;
Yet will he swear he loves .

Nay , pray thee , come ;
Or if thou wilt hold longer argument ,
Do it in notes .

Note this before my notes ;
There's not a note of mine that's worth the noting .

Why these are very crotchets that he speaks ;
Notes , notes , forsooth , and nothing !


Now , divine air ! now is his soul ravished ! Is it not strange that sheeps' guts should hale souls out of men's bodies ? Well , a horn for my money , when all's done .

Sigh no more , ladies , sigh no more ,
Men were deceivers ever ;
One foot in sea , and one on shore ,
To one thing constant never .
Then sigh not so ,
But let them go ,
And be you blithe and bonny ,
Converting all your sounds of woe 
Into Hey nonny , nonny .
Sing no more ditties , sing no mo 
Of dumps so dull and heavy ;
The fraud of men was ever so ,
Since summer first was leavy .
Then sigh not so ,
But let them go ,
And be you blithe and bonny ,
Converting all your sounds of woe 
Into Hey nonny , nonny .


By my troth , a good song .

And an ill singer , my lord .

Ha , no , no , faith ; thou singest well enough for a shift .

An he had been a dog that should have howled thus , they would have hanged him ; and I pray God his bad voice bode no mischief . I had as lief have heard the night-raven , come what plague could have come after it .

Yea , marry ; dost thou hear , Balthazar ? I pray thee , get us some excellent music , for to-morrow night we would have it at the Lady Hero's chamber-window .

The best I can , my lord .

Do so : farewell .

Come hither , Leonato : what was it you told me of to-day , that your niece Beatrice was in love with Signior Benedick ?

O ! ay :

Stalk on , stalk on ; the fowl sits . I did never think that lady would have loved any man .

No , nor I neither ; but most wonderful that she should so dote on Signior Benedick , whom she hath in all outward behaviours seemed ever to abhor .

Is't possible ? Sits the wind in that corner ?

By my troth , my lord , I cannot tell what to think of it but that she loves him with an enraged affection : it is past the infinite of thought .

May be she doth but counterfeit .

Faith , like enough .

O God ! counterfeit ! There was never counterfeit of passion came so near the life of passion as she discovers it .

Why , what effects of passion shows she ?

Bait the hook well : this fish will bite .

What effects , my lord ? She will sit you ;

You heard my daughter tell you how .

She did , indeed .

How , how , I pray you ? You amaze me : I would have thought her spirit had been invincible against all assaults of affection .

I would have sworn it had , my lord ; especially against Benedick .

I should think this a gull , but that the white-bearded fellow speaks it : knavery cannot , sure , hide itself in such reverence .

He hath ta'en the infection : hold it up .

Hath she made her affection known to Benedick ?

No ; and swears she never will : that's her torment .

'Tis true , indeed ; so your daughter says : 'Shall I ,' says she , 'that have so oft encountered him with scorn , write to him that I love him ?' 

This says she now when she is beginning to write to him ; for she'll be up twenty times a night , and there will she sit in her smock till she have writ a sheet of paper : my daughter tells us all .

Now you talk of a sheet of paper , I remember a pretty jest your daughter told us of .

O ! when she had writ it , and was reading it over , she found Benedick and Beatrice between the sheet ?

That .

O ! she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence ; railed at herself , that she should be so immodest to write to one that she knew would flout her : 'I measure him ,' says she , 'by my own spirit ; for I should flout him , if he writ to me ; yea , though I love him , I should .' 

Then down upon her knees she falls , weeps , sobs , beats her heart , tears her hair , prays , curses ; 'O sweet Benedick ! God give me patience !' 

She doth indeed ; my daughter says so ; and the ecstasy hath so much overborne her , that my daughter is sometimes afeard she will do a desperate outrage to herself . It is very true .

It were good that Benedick knew of it by some other , if she will not discover it .

To what end ? he would but make a sport of it and torment the poor lady worse .

An he should , it were an alms to hang him . She's an excellent sweet lady , and , out of all suspicion , she is virtuous .

And she is exceeding wise .

In everything but in loving Benedick .

O ! my lord , wisdom and blood combating in so tender a body , we have ten proofs to one that blood hath the victory . I am sorry for her , as I have just cause , being her uncle and her guardian .

I would she had bestowed this dotage on me ; I would have daffed all other respects and made her half myself . I pray you , tell Benedick of it , and hear what a' will say .

Were it good , think you ?

Hero thinks surely she will die ; for she says she will die if he love her not , and she will die ere she make her love known , and she will die if he woo her , rather than she will bate one breath of her accustomed crossness .

She doth well : if she should make tender of her love , 'tis very possible he'll scorn it ; for the man ,as you know all ,hath a contemptible spirit .

he is a very proper man .

He hath indeed a good outward happiness .

'Fore God , and in my mind , very wise .

He doth indeed show some sparks that are like wit .

And I take him to be valiant .

As Hector , I assure you : and in the managing of quarrels you may say he is wise ; for either he avoids them with great discretion , or undertakes them with a most Christian-like fear .

If he do fear God , a' must necessarily keep peace : if he break the peace , he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and trembling .

And so will he do ; for the man doth fear God , howsoever it seems not in him by some large jests he will make . Well , I am sorry for your niece . Shall we go seek Benedick , and tell him of her love ?

Never tell him , my lord : let her wear it out with good counsel .

Nay , that's impossible : she may wear her heart out first .

Well , we will hear further of it by your daughter : let it cool the while . I love Benedick well , and I could wish he would modestly examine himself , to see how much he is unworthy to have so good a lady .

My lord , will you walk ? dinner is ready .

If he do not dote on her upon this , I will never trust my expectation .

Let there be the same net spread for her ; and that must your daughter and her gentlewoman carry . The sport will be , when they hold one an opinion of another's dotage , and no such matter : that's the scene that I would see , which will be merely a dumbshow . Let us send her to call him in to dinner .


This can be no trick : the conference was sadly borne . They have the truth of this from Hero . They seem to pity the lady : it seems , her affections have their full bent . Love me ! why , it must be requited . I hear how I am censured : they say I will bear myself proudly , if I perceive the love come from her ; they say too that she will rather die than give any sign of affection . I did never think to marry : I must not seem proud : happy are they that hear their detractions , and can put them to mending . They say the lady is fair : 'tis a truth , I can bear them witness ; and virtuous : 'tis so , I cannot reprove it ; and wise , but for loving me : by my troth , it is no addition to her wit , nor no great argument of her folly , for I will be horribly in love with her . I may chance have some odd quirks and remnants of wit broken on me , because I have railed so long against marriage ; but doth not the appetite alter ? A man loves the meat in his youth that he cannot endure in his age . Shall quips and sentences and these paper bullets of the brain awe a man from the career of his humour ? No ; the world must be peopled . When I said I would die a bachelor , I did not think I should live till I were married . Here comes Beatrice . By this day ! she's a fair lady : I do spy some marks of love in her .


Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner .

Fair Beatrice , I thank you for your pains .

I took no more pains for those thanks than you take pains to thank me : if it had been painful , I would not have come .

You take pleasure then in the message ?

Yea , just so much as you may take upon a knife's point , and choke a daw withal . You have no stomach , signior : fare you well .


Ha ! 'Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner ,' there's a double meaning in that . 'I took no more pains for those thanks than you took pains to thank me ,' that's as much as to say , Any pains that I take for you is as easy as thanks . If I do not take pity of her , I am a villain ; if I do not love her , I am a Jew . I will go get her picture .

Good Margaret , run thee to the parlour ;
There shalt thou find my cousin Beatrice 
Proposing with the prince and Claudio :
Whisper her ear , and tell her , I and Ursula 
Walk in the orchard , and our whole discourse 
Is all of her ; say that thou overheard'st us ,
And bid her steal into the pleached bower ,
Where honey-suckles , ripen'd by the sun ,
Forbid the sun to enter ; like favourites ,
Made proud by princes , that advance their pride 
Against that power that bred it . There will she hide her ,
To listen our propose . This is thy office ;
Bear thee well in it and leave us alone .

I'll make her come , I warrant you , presently .


Now , Ursula , when Beatrice doth come ,
As we do trace this alley up and down ,
Our talk must only be of Benedick :
When I do name him , let it be thy part 
To praise him more than ever man did merit .
My talk to thee must be how Benedick 
Is sick in love with Beatrice : of this matter 
Is little Cupid's crafty arrow made ,
That only wounds by hearsay .


Now begin ;
For look where Beatrice , like a lapwing , runs 

Close by the ground , to hear our conference .

The pleasant'st angling is to see the fish 
Cut with her golden oars the silver stream ,
And greedily devour the treacherous bait :
So angle we for Beatrice ; who even now 
Is couched in the woodbine coverture .
Fear you not my part of the dialogue .

Then go we near her , that her ear lose nothing 
Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it .

No , truly , Ursula , she is too disdainful ;
I know her spirits are as coy and wild 
As haggerds of the rock .

But are you sure 
That Benedick loves Beatrice so entirely ?

So says the prince , and my new-trothed lord .

And did they bid you tell her of it , madam ?

They did entreat me to acquaint her of it ;
But I persuaded them , if they lov'd Benedick ,
To wish him wrestle with affection ,
And never to let Beatrice know of it .

Why did you so ? Doth not the gentleman 
Deserve as full as fortunate a bed 
As ever Beatrice shall couch upon ?

O god of love ! I know he doth deserve 
As much as may be yielded to a man ;
But nature never fram'd a woman's heart 
Of prouder stuff than that of Beatrice ;
Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes ,
Misprising what they look on , and her wit 
Values itself so highly , that to her 
All matter else seems weak . She cannot love ,
Nor take no shape nor project of affection ,
She is so self-endear'd .

Sure , I think so ;
And therefore certainly it were not good 
She knew his love , lest she make sport at it .

Why , you speak truth . I never yet saw man ,
How wise , how noble , young , how rarely featur'd ,
But she would spell him backward : if fair-fac'd ,
She would swear the gentleman should be her sister ;
If black , why , Nature , drawing of an antick ,
Made a foul blot ; if tall , a lance ill-headed ;
If low , an agate very vilely cut ;
If speaking , why , a vane blown with all winds ;
If silent , why , a block moved with none .
So turns she every man the wrong side out ,
And never gives to truth and virtue that 
Which simpleness and merit purchaseth .

Sure , sure , such carping is not commendable .

No ; not to be so odd and from all fashions 
As Beatrice is , cannot be commendable .
But who dare tell her so ? If I should speak ,
She would mock me into air : O ! she would laugh me 
Out of myself , press me to death with wit .
Therefore let Benedick , like cover'd fire ,
Consume away in sighs , waste inwardly :
It were a better death than die with mocks ,
Which is as bad as die with tickling .

Yet tell her of it : hear what she will say .

No ; rather I will go to Benedick ,
And counsel him to fight against his passion .
And , truly , I'll devise some honest slanders 
To stain my cousin with . One doth not know 
How much an ill word may empoison liking .

O ! do not do your cousin such a wrong .
She cannot be so much without true judgment ,
Having so swift and excellent a wit 
As she is priz'd to have ,as to refuse 
So rare a gentleman as Signior Benedick .

He is the only man of Italy ,
Always excepted my dear Claudio .

I pray you , be not angry with me , madam ,
Speaking my fancy : Signior Benedick ,
For shape , for bearing , argument and valour ,
Goes foremost in report through Italy .

Indeed , he hath an excellent good name .

His excellence did earn it , ere he had it .
When are you married , madam ?

Why , every day , to-morrow . Come , go in :
I'll show thee some attires , and have thy counsel 
Which is the best to furnish me to-morrow .

She's lim'd , I warrant you : we have caught her , madam .

If it prove so , then loving goes by haps :
Some Cupid kills with arrows , some with traps .


What fire is in mine ears ? Can this be true ?
Stand I condemn'd for pride and scorn so much ?
Contempt , farewell ! and maiden pride , adieu !
No glory lives behind the back of such .
And , Benedick , love on ; I will requite thee ,
Taming my wild heart to thy loving hand :
If thou dost love , my kindness shall incite thee 
To bind our loves up in a holy band ;
For others say thou dost deserve , and I 
Believe it better than reportingly .


I do but stay till your marriage be consummate , and then go I toward Arragon .

I'll bring you thither , my lord , if you'll vouchsafe me .

Nay , that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your marriage , as to show a child his new coat and forbid him to wear it . I will only be bold with Benedick for his company ; for , from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot , he is all mirth : he hath twice or thrice cut Cupid's bow-string , and the little hangman dare not shoot at him . He hath a heart as sound as a bell , and his tongue is the clapper ; for what his heart thinks his tongue speaks .

Gallants , I am not as I have been .

So say I : methinks you are sadder .

I hope he be in love .

Hang him , truant ! there's no true drop of blood in him , to be truly touched with love . If he be sad , he wants money .

I have the tooth-ache .

Draw it .

Hang it .

You must hang it first , and draw it afterwards .

What ! sigh for the tooth-ache ?

Where is but a humour or a worm ?

Well , every one can master a grief but he that has it .

Yet say I , he is in love .

There is no appearance of fancy in him , unless it be a fancy that he hath to strange disguises ; as , to be a Dutchman to-day , a Frenchman to-morrow , or in the shape of two countries at once , as a German from the waist downward , all slops , and a Spaniard from the hip upward , no doublet . Unless he have a fancy to this foolery , as it appears he hath , he is no fool for fancy , as you would have it appear he is .

If he be not in love with some woman , there is no believing old signs : a' brushes his hat a mornings ; what should that bode ?

Hath any man seen him at the barber's ?

No , but the barber's man hath been seen with him ; and the old ornament of his cheek hath already stuffed tennis-balls .

Indeed he looks younger than he did , by the loss of a beard .

Nay , a' rubs himself with civet : can you smell him out by that ?

That's as much as to say the sweet youth's in love .

The greatest note of it is his melancholy .

And when was he wont to wash his face ?

Yea , or to paint himself ? for the which , I hear what they say of him .

Nay , but his jesting spirit ; which is now crept into a lute-string , and new-governed by stops .

Indeed , that tells a heavy tale for him . Conclude , conclude he is in love .

Nay , but I know who loves him .

That would I know too : I warrant , one that knows him not .

Yes , and his ill conditions ; and in despite of all , dies for him .

She shall be buried with her face upwards .

Yet is this no charm for the tooth-ache .
Old signior , walk aside with me : I have studied eight or nine wise words to speak to you , which these hobby-horses must not hear .


For my life , to break with him about Beatrice .

'Tis even so . Hero and Margaret have by this played their parts with Beatrice , and then the two bears will not bite one another when they meet .


My lord and brother , God save you !

Good den , brother .

If your leisure served , I would speak with you .

In private ?

If it please you ; yet Count Claudio may hear , for what I would speak of concerns him .

What's the matter ?

Means your lordship to be married to-morrow ?

You know he does .

I know not that , when he knows what I know .

If there be any impediment , I pray you discover it .

You may think I love you not : let that appear hereafter , and aim better at me by that I now will manifest . For my brother , I think he holds you well , and in dearness of heart hath holp to effect your ensuing marriage ; surely suit ill-spent , and labour ill bestowed !

Why , what's the matter ?

I came hither to tell you ; and circumstances shortened ,for she hath been too long a talking of ,the lady is disloyal .

Who , Hero ?

Even she : Leonato's Hero , your Hero , every man's Hero .

Disloyal ?

The word's too good to paint out her wickedness ; I could say , she were worse : think you of a worse title , and I will fit her to it . Wonder not till further warrant : go but with me to-night , you shall see her chamber-window entered , even the night before her wedding-day : if you love her then , to-morrow wed her ; but it would better fit your honour to change your mind .

May this be so ?

I will not think it .

If you dare not trust that you see , confess not that you know . If you will follow me , I will show you enough ; and when you have seen more and heard more , proceed accordingly .

If I see any thing to-night why I should not marry her to-morrow , in the congregation , where I should wed , there will I shame her .

And , as I wooed for thee to obtain her , I will join with thee to disgrace her .

I will disparage her no further till you are my witnesses : bear it coldly but till midnight , and let the issue show itself .

O day untowardly turned !

O mischief strangely thwarting !

O plague right well prevented ! So will you say when you have seen the sequel .


Are you good men and true ?

Yea , or else it were pity but they should suffer salvation , body and soul .

Nay , that were a punishment too good for them , if they should have any allegiance in them , being chosen for the prince's watch .

Well , give them their charge , neighbour Dogberry .

First , who think you the most desartless man to be constable ?

Hugh Oatcake , sir , or George Seacoal ; for they can write and read .

Come hither , neighbour Seacoal . God hath blessed you with a good name : to be a well-favoured man is the gift of fortune ; but to write and read comes by nature .

Both which , Master constable ,

You have : I knew it would be your answer . Well , for your favour , sir , why , give God thanks , and make no boast of it ; and for your writing and reading , let that appear when there is no need of such vanity . You are thought here to be the most senseless and fit man for the constable of the watch ; therefore bear you the lanthorn . This is your charge : you shall comprehend all vagrom men ; you are to bid any man stand , in the prince's name .

How , if a' will not stand ?

Why , then , take no note of him , but let him go ; and presently call the rest of the watch together , and thank God you are rid of a knave .

If he will not stand when he is bidden , he is none of the prince's subjects .

True , and they are to meddle with none but the prince's subjects . You shall also make no noise in the streets : for , for the watch to babble and to talk is most tolerable and not to be endured .

We will rather sleep than talk : we know what belongs to a watch .

Why , you speak like an ancient and most quiet watchman , for I cannot see how sleeping should offend ; only have a care that your bills be not stolen . Well , you are to call at all the alehouses , and bid those that are drunk get them to bed .

How if they will not ?

Why then , let them alone till they are sober : if they make you not then the better answer , you may say they are not the men you took them for .

Well , sir .

If you meet a thief , you may suspect him , by virtue of your office , to be no true man ; and , for such kind of men , the less you meddle or make with them , why , the more is for your honesty .

If we know him to be a thief , shall we not lay hands on him ?

Truly , by your office , you may ; but I think they that touch pitch will be defiled . The most peaceable way for you , if you do take a thief , is , to let him show himself what he is and steal out of your company .

You have been always called a merciful man , partner .

Truly , I would not hang a dog by my will , much more a man who hath any honesty in him .

If you hear a child cry in the night , you must call to the nurse and bid her still it .

How if the nurse be asleep and will not hear us ?

Why , then , depart in peace , and let the child wake her with crying ; for the ewe that will not hear her lamb when it baes , will never answer a calf when he bleats .

'Tis very true .

This is the end of the charge . You constable , are to present the prince's own person : if you meet the prince in the night , you may stay him .

Nay , by 'r lady , that I think , a' cannot .

Five shillings to one on't , with any man that knows the statues , he may stay him : marry , not without the prince be willing ; for , indeed , the watch ought to offend no man , and it is an offence to stay a man against his will .

By 'r lady , I think it be so .

Ha , ah , ha ! Well , masters , good night : an there be any matter of weight chances , call up me : keep your fellows' counsels and your own , and good night . Come , neighbour .

Well , masters , we hear our charge : let us go sit here upon the church-bench till two , and then all go to bed .

One word more , honest neighbours . I pray you , watch about Signior Leonato's door ; for the wedding being there to-morrow , there is a great coil to-night . Adieu ; be vigitant , I beseech you .

What , Conrade !

Peace ! stir not .

Conrade , I say !

Here , man , I am at thy elbow .

Mass , and my elbow itched ; I thought there would a scab follow .

I will owe thee an answer for that ; and now forward with thy tale .

Stand thee close then under this penthouse , for it drizzles rain , and I will , like a true drunkard , utter all to thee .

Some treason , masters ; yet stand close .

Therefore know , I have earned of Don John a thousand ducats .

Is it possible that any villany should be so dear ?

Thou shouldst rather ask if it were possible any villany should be so rich ; for when rich villains have need of poor ones , poor ones may make what price they will .

I wonder at it .

That shows thou art unconfirmed . Thou knowest that the fashion of a doublet , or a hat , or a cloak , is nothing to a man .

Yes , it is apparel .

I mean , the fashion .

Yes , the fashion is the fashion .

Tush ! I may as well say the fool's the fool . But seest thou not what a deformed thief this fashion is ?

I know that Deformed ; a' has been a vile thief this seven years ; a' goes up and down like a gentleman : I remember his name .

Didst thou not hear somebody ?

No : 'twas the vane on the house .

Seest thou not , I say , what a deformed thief this fashion is ? how giddily he turns about all the hot bloods between fourteen and five-and-thirty ? sometime fashioning them like Pharaoh's soldiers in the reechy painting ; sometime like god Bel's priests in the old church-window ; sometime like the shaven Hercules in the smirched worm-eaten tapestry , where his cod-piece seems as massy as his club ?

All this I see , and I see that the fashion wears out more apparel than the man . But art not thou thyself giddy with the fashion too , that thou hast shifted out of thy tale into telling me of the fashion ?

Not so , neither ; but know , that I have to-night wooed Margaret , the Lady Hero's gentlewoman , by the name of Hero : she leans me out at her mistress' chamber-window , bids me a thousand times good night ,I tell this tale vilely :I should first tell thee how the prince , Claudio , and my master , planted and placed and possessed by my master Don John , saw afar off in the orchard this amiable encounter .

And thought they Margaret was Hero ?

Two of them did , the prince and Claudio ; but the devil my master , knew she was Margaret ; and partly by his oaths , which first possessed them , partly by the dark night , which did deceive them , but chiefly by my villany , which did confirm any slander that Don John had made , away went Claudio enraged ; swore he would meet her , as he was appointed , next morning at the temple , and there , before the whole congregation , shame her with what he saw o'er night , and send her home again without a husband .

We charge you in the prince's name , stand !

Call up the right Master constable . We have here recovered the most dangerous piece of lechery that ever was known in the commonwealth .

And one Deformed is one of them : I know him , a' wears a lock .

Masters , masters !

You'll be made bring Deformed forth , I warrant you .

Masters ,

Never speak : we charge you let us obey you to go with us .

We are like to prove a goodly commodity , being taken up of these men's bills .

A commodity in question , I warrant you . Come , we'll obey you .


Good Ursula , wake my cousin Beatrice , and desire her to rise .

I will , lady .

And bid her come hither .

Well .


Troth , I think your other rabato were better .

No , pray thee , good Meg , I'll wear this .

By my troth's not so good ; and I warrant your cousin will say so .

My cousin's a fool , and thou art another : I'll wear none but this .

I like the new tire within excellently , if the hair were a thought browner ; and your gown's a most rare fashion , i' faith . I saw the Duchess of Milan's gown that they praise so .

O ! that exceeds , they say .

By my troth's but a night-gown in respect of yours : cloth o' gold , and cuts , and laced with silver , set with pearls , down sleeves , side sleeves , and skirts round , underborne with a bluish tinsel ; but for a fine , quaint , graceful , and excellent fashion , yours is worth ten on't .

God give me joy to wear it ! for my heart is exceeding heavy .

'Twill be heavier soon by the weight of a man .

Fie upon thee ! art not ashamed ?

Of what , lady ? of speaking honourably ? is not marriage honourable in a beggar ? Is not your lord honourable without marriage ? I think you would have me say , 'saving your reverence , a husband :' an bad thinking do not wrest true speaking , I'll offend nobody . Is there any harm in 'the heavier for a husband ?' None , I think , an it be the right husband and the right wife ; otherwise 'tis light , and not heavy : ask my Lady Beatrice else ; here she comes .


Good morrow , coz .

Good morrow , sweet Hero .

Why , how now ! do you speak in the sick tune ?

I am out of all other tune , methinks .

Clap's into 'Light o' love ;' that goes without a burden : do you sing it , and I'll dance it .

Ye light o' love with your heels ! then , if your husband have stables enough , you'll see he shall lack no barns .

O illegitimate construction ! I scorn that with my heels .

'Tis almost five o'clock , cousin ; 'tis time you were ready . By my troth , I am exceeding ill . Heigh-ho !

For a hawk , a horse , or a husband ?

For the letter that begins them all , H .

Well , an you be not turned Turk , there's no more sailing by the star .

What means the fool , trow ?

Nothing I ; but God send every one their heart's desire !

These gloves the count sent me ; they are an excellent perfume .

I am stuffed , cousin , I cannot smell .

A maid , and stuffed ! there's goodly catching of cold .

O , God help me ! God help me ! how long have you professed apprehension ?

Ever since you left it . Doth not my wit become me rarely !

It is not seen enough , you should wear it in your cap . By my troth , I am sick .

Get you some of this distilled Carduus Benedictus , and lay it to your heart : it is the only thing for a qualm .

There thou prick'st her with a thistle .

Benedictus ! why Benedictus ? you have some moral in this Benedictus .

Moral ! no , by my troth , I have no moral meaning ; I meant , plain holy-thistle . You may think , perchance , that I think you are in love : nay , by'r lady , I am not such a fool to think what I list ; nor I list not to think what I can ; nor , indeed , I cannot think , if I would think my heart out of thinking , that you are in love , or that you will be in love , or that you can be in love . Yet Benedick was such another , and now is he become a man : he swore he would never marry ; and yet now , in despite of his heart , he eats his meat without grudging : and how you may be converted , I know not ; but methinks you look with your eyes as other women do .

What pace is this that thy tongue keeps ?

Not a false gallop .


Madam , withdraw : the prince , the count , Signior Benedick , Don John , and all the gallants of the town , are come to fetch you to church .

Help to dress me , good coz , good Meg , good Ursula .


What would you with me , honest neighbour ?

Marry , sir , I would have some confidence with you , that decerns you nearly .

Brief , I pray you ; for you see it is a busy time with me .

Marry , this it is , sir .

Yes , in truth it is , sir .

What is it , my good friends ?

Goodman Verges , sir , speaks a little off the matter : an old man , sir , and his wits are not so blunt , as , God help , I would desire they were ; but , in faith , honest as the skin between his brows .

Yes , I thank God , I am as honest as any man living , that is an old man and no honester than I .

Comparisons are odorous : palabras , neighbour Verges .

Neighbours , you are tedious .

It pleases your worship to say so , but we are the poor duke's officers ; but truly , for mine own part , if I were as tedious as a king , I could find in my heart to bestow it all of your worship .

All thy tediousness on me ! ha ?

Yea , an't were a thousand pound more than 'tis ; for I hear as good exclamation on your worship , as of any man in the city , and though I be but a poor man , I am glad to hear it .

And so am I .

I would fain know what you have to say .

Marry , sir , our watch to-night , excepting your worship's presence , ha' ta'en a couple of as arrant knaves as any in Messina .

A good old man , sir ; he will be talking ; as they say , 'when the age is in , the wit is out .' God help us ! it is a world to see ! Well said , i' faith , neighbour Verges : well , God's a good man ; an two men ride of a horse , one must ride behind . An honest soul , i' faith , sir ; by my troth he is , as ever broke bread : but God is to be worshipped : all men are not alike ; alas ! good neighbour .

Indeed , neighbour , he comes too short of you .

Gifts that God gives .

I must leave you .

One word , sir : our watch , sir , hath indeed comprehended two aspicious persons , and we would have them this morning examined before your worship .

Take their examination yourself , and bring it me : I am now in great haste , as may appear unto you .

It shall be suffigance .

Drink some wine ere you go : fare you well .


My lord , they stay for you to give your daughter to her husband .

I'll wait upon them : I am ready .


Go , good partner , go , get you to Francis Seacoal ; bid him bring his pen and inkhorn to the gaol : we are now to examination these men .

And we must do it wisely .

We will spare for no wit , I warrant you ; here's that shall drive some of them to a non-come : only get the learned writer to set down our excommunication , and meet me at the gaol .

Come , Friar Francis , be brief : only to the plain form of marriage , and you shall recount their particular duties afterwards .

You come hither , my lord , to marry this lady ?

No .

To be married to her , friar ; you come to marry her .

Lady , you come hither to be married to this count ?

I do .

If either of you know any inward impediment , why you should not be conjoined , I charge you , on your souls , to utter it .

Know you any , Hero ?

None , my lord .

Know you any , count ?

I dare make his answer ; none .

O ! what men dare do ! what men may do ! what men daily do , not knowing what they do !

How now ! Interjections ? Why then , some be of laughing , as ah ! ha ! he !

Stand thee by , friar . Father , by your leave :
Will you with free and unconstrained soul 
Give me this maid , your daughter ?

As freely , son , as God did give her me .

And what have I to give you back whose worth 
May counterpoise this rich and precious gift ?

Nothing , unless you render her again .

Sweet prince , you learn me noble thankfulness .
There , Leonato , take her back again :
Give not this rotten orange to your friend ;
She's but the sign and semblance of her honour .
Behold ! how like a maid she blushes here .
O ! what authority and show of truth 
Can cunning sin cover itself withal .
Comes not that blood as modest evidence 
To witness simple virtue ? Would you not swear ,
All you that see her , that she were a maid ,
By these exterior shows ? But she is none :
She knows the heat of a luxurious bed ;
Her blush is guiltiness , not modesty .

What do you mean , my lord ?

Not to be married ,
Not to knit my soul to an approved wanton .

Dear my lord , if you , in your own proof ,
Have vanquish'd the resistance of her youth ,
And made defeat of her virginity ,

I know what you would say : if I have known her ,
You'll say she did embrace me as a husband ,
And so extenuate the 'forehand sin :
No , Leonato ,
I never tempted her with word too large ;
But , as a brother to his sister , show'd 
Bashful sincerity and comely love .

And seem'd I ever otherwise to you ?

Out on thee ! Seeming ! I will write against it :
You seem to me as Dian in her orb ,
As chaste as is the bud ere it be blown ;
But you are more intemperate in your blood 
Than Venus , or those pamper'd animals 
That rage in savage sensuality .

Is my lord well , that he doth speak so wide ?

Sweet prince , why speak not you ?

What should I speak ?
I stand dishonour'd , that have gone about 
To link my dear friend to a common stale .

Are these things spoken , or do I but dream ?

Sir , they are spoken , and these things are true .

This looks not like a nuptial .

True ! O God !

Leonato , stand I here ?
Is this the prince ? Is this the prince's brother ?
Is this face Hero's ? Are our eyes our own ?

All this is so ; but what of this , my lord ?

Let me but move one question to your daughter ;
And by that fatherly and kindly power 
That you have in her , bid her answer truly .

I charge thee do so , as thou art my child .

O , God defend me ! how am I beset !
What kind of catechizing call you this ?

To make you answer truly to your name .

Is it not Hero ? Who can blot that name 
With any just reproach ?

Marry , that can Hero :
Hero itself can blot out Hero's virtue .
What man was he talk'd with you yesternight 
Out at your window , betwixt twelve and one ?
Now , if you are a maid , answer to this .

I talk'd with no man at that hour , my lord .

Why , then are you no maiden . Leonato ,
I am sorry you must hear : upon mine honour ,
Myself , my brother , and this grieved count ,
Did see her , hear her , at that hour last night ,
Talk with a ruffian at her chamber-window ;
Who hath indeed , most like a liberal villain ,
Confess'd the vile encounters they have had 
A thousand times in secret .

Fie , fie ! they are not to be nam'd , my lord ,
Not to be spoke of ;
There is not chastity enough in language 
Without offence to utter them . Thus , pretty lady ,
I am sorry for thy much misgovernment .

O Hero ! what a Hero hadst thou been ,
If half thy outward graces had been plac'd 
About thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart !
But fare thee well , most foul , most fair ! farewell ,
Thou pure impiety , and impious purity !
For thee I'll lock up all the gates of love ,
And on my eyelids shall conjecture hang ,
To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm ,
And never shall it more be gracious .

Hath no man's dagger here a point for me ?


Why , how now , cousin ! wherefore sink you down ?

Come , let us go . These things , come thus to light ,
Smother her spirits up .


How doth the lady ?

Dead , I think ! help , uncle !
Hero ! why , Hero ! Uncle ! Signior Benedick !
Friar !

O Fate ! take not away thy heavy hand :
Death is the fairest cover for her shame 
That may be wish'd for .

How now , cousin Hero !

Have comfort , lady .

Dost thou look up ?

Yea ; wherefore should she not ?

Wherefore ! Why , doth not every earthly thing 
Cry shame upon her ? Could she here deny 
The story that is printed in her blood ?
Do not live , Hero ; do not ope thine eyes ;
For , did I think thou wouldst not quickly die ,
Thought I thy spirits were stronger than thy shames ,
Myself would , on the rearward of reproaches ,
Strike at thy life . Griev'd I , I had but one ?
Chid I for that at frugal nature's frame ?
O ! one too much by thee . Why had I one ?
Why ever wast thou lovely in mine eyes ?
Why had I not with charitable hand 
Took up a beggar's issue at my gates ,
Who smirched thus , and mir'd with infamy ,
I might have said , 'No part of it is mine ;
This shame derives itself from unknown loins ?' 
But mine , and mine I lov'd , and mine I prais'd ,
And mine that I was proud on , mine so much 
That I myself was to myself not mine ,
Valuing of her ; why , she O ! she is fallen 
Into a pit of ink , that the wide sea 
Hath drops too few to wash her clean again ,
And salt too little which may season give 
To her foul-tainted flesh .

Sir , sir , be patient .
For my part , I am so attir'd in wonder ,
I know not what to say .

O ! on my soul , my cousin is belied !

Lady , were you her bedfellow last night ?

No , truly , not ; although , until last night ,
I have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow .

Confirm'd , confirm'd ! O ! that is stronger made ,
Which was before barr'd up with ribs of iron .
Would the two princes lie ? and Claudio lie ,
Who lov'd her so , that , speaking of her foulness ,
Wash'd it with tears ? Hence from her ! let her die .

Hear me a little ;
For I have only been silent so long ,
And given way unto this course of fortune ,
By noting of the lady : I have mark'd 
A thousand blushing apparitions 
To start into her face ; a thousand innocent shames 
In angel whiteness bear away those blushes ;
And in her eye there hath appear'd a fire ,
To burn the errors that these princess hold 
Against her maiden truth . Call me a fool ;
Trust not my reading nor my observations ,
Which with experimental seal doth warrant 
The tenour of my book ; trust not my age ,
My reverence , calling , nor divinity ,
If this sweet lady lie not guiltless here 
Under some biting error .

Friar , it cannot be .
Thou seest that all the grace that she hath left 
Is , that she will not add to her damnation 
A sin of perjury : she not denies it .
Why seek'st thou then to cover with excuse 
That which appears in proper nakedness ?

Lady , what man is he you are accus'd of ?

They know that do accuse me , I know none ;
If I know more of any man alive 
Than that which maiden modesty doth warrant ,
Let all my sins lack mercy ! O , my father !
Prove you that any man with me convers'd 
At hours unmeet , or that I yesternight 
Maintain'd the change of words with any creature ,
Refuse me , hate me , torture me to death .

There is some strange misprision in the princes .

Two of them have the very bent of honour ;
And if their wisdoms be misled in this ,
The practice of it lives in John the bastard ,
Whose spirits toil in frame of villanies .

I know not . If they speak but truth of her ,
These hands shall tear her ; if they wrong her honour ,
The proudest of them shall well hear of it .
Time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine .
Nor age so eat up my invention ,
Nor fortune made such havoc of my means ,
Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends ,
But they shall find , awak'd in such a kind ,
Both strength of limb and policy of mind ,
Ability in means and choice of friends ,
To quit me of them throughly .

Pause awhile ,
And let my counsel sway you in this case .
Your daughter here the princes left for dead ;
Let her awhile be secretly kept in ,
And publish it that she is dead indeed :
Maintain a mourning ostentation ;
And on your family's old monument 
Hang mournful epitaphs and do all rites 
That appertain unto a burial .

What shall become of this ? What will this do ?

Marry , this well carried shall on her behalf 
Change slander to remorse ; that is some good :
But not for that dream I on this strange course ,
But on this travail look for greater birth .
She dying , as it must be so maintain'd ,
Upon the instant that she was accus'd ,
Shall be lamented , pitied and excus'd 
Of every hearer ; for it so falls out 
That what we have we prize not to the worth 
Whiles we enjoy it , but being lack'd and lost ,
Why , then we rack the value , then we find 
The virtue that possession would not show us 
Whiles it was ours . So will it fare with Claudio :
When he shall hear she died upon his words ,
The idea of her life shall sweetly creep 
Into his study of imagination ,
And every lovely organ of her life 
Shall come apparell'd in more precious habit ,
More moving-delicate , and full of life 
Into the eye and prospect of his soul ,
Than when she liv'd indeed : then shall he mourn ,
If ever love had interest in his liver ,
And wish he had not so accused her ,
No , though he thought his accusation true .
Let this be so , and doubt not but success 
Will fashion the event in better shape 
Than I can lay it down in likelihood .
But if all aim but this be levell'd false ,
The supposition of the lady's death 
Will quench the wonder of her infamy :
And if it sort not well , you may conceal her ,
As best befits her wounded reputation ,
In some reclusive and religious life ,
Out of all eyes , tongues , minds , and injuries .

Signior Leonato , let the friar advise you :
And though you know my inwardness and love 
Is very much unto the prince and Claudio ,
Yet , by mine honour , I will deal in this 
As secretly and justly as your soul 
Should with your body .

Being that I flow in grief ,
The smallest twine may lead me .

'Tis well consented : presently away ;
For to strange sores strangely they strain the cure .
Come , lady , die to live : this wedding day 
Perhaps is but prolong'd : have patience and endure .


Lady Beatrice , have you wept all this while ?

Yea , and I will weep a while longer .

I will not desire that .

You have no reason ; I do it freely .

Surely I do believe your fair cousin is wronged .

Ah ! how much might the man deserve of me that would right her .

Is there any way to show such friendship ?

A very even way , but no such friend .

May a man do it ?

It is a man's office , but not yours .

I do love nothing in the world so well as you : is not that strange ?

As strange as the thing I know not .
It were as possible for me to say I loved nothing so well as your , but believe me not , and yet I lie not ; I confess nothing , not I deny nothing . I am sorry for my cousin .

By my sword , Beatrice , thou lovest me .

Do not swear by it , and eat it .

I will swear by it that you love me ; and I will make him eat it that says I love not you .

Will you not eat your word ?

With no sauce that can be devised to it . I protest I love thee .

Why then , God forgive me !

What offence , sweet Beatrice ?

You have stayed me in a happy hour :
I was about to protest I loved you .

And do it with all thy heart .

I love you with so much of my heart that none is left to protest .

Come , bid me do anything for thee .

Kill Claudio .

Ha ! not for the wide world .

You kill me to deny it . Farewell .

Tarry , sweet Beatrice .

I am gone , though I am here : there is no love in you : nay , I pray you , let me go .

Beatrice ,

In faith , I will go .

We'll be friends first .

You dare easier be friends with me than fight with mine enemy .

Is Claudio thine enemy ?

Is he not approved in the height a villain , that hath slandered , scorned , dishonoured my kinswoman ? O ! that I were a man . What ! bear her in hand until they come to take hands , and then , with public accusation , uncovered slander , unmitigated rancour ,O God , that I were a man ! I would eat his heart in the market-place .

Hear me , Beatrice ,

Talk with a man out at a window ! a proper saying !

Nay , but Beatrice ,

Sweet Hero ! she is wronged , she is slandered , she is undone .

Beat 

Princes and counties ! Surely , a princely testimony , a goodly Count Comfect ; a sweet gallant , surely ! O ! that I were a man for his sake , or that I had any friend would be a man for my sake ! But manhood is melted into curtsies , valour into compliment , and men are only turned into tongue , and trim ones too : he is now as valiant as Hercules , that only tells a lie and swears it . I cannot be a man with wishing , therefore I will die a woman with grieving .

Tarry , good Beatrice . By this hand , I love thee .

Use it for my love some other way than swearing by it .

Think you in your soul the Count Claudio hath wronged Hero ?

Yea , as sure as I have a thought or a soul .

Enough ! I am engaged , I will challenge him . I will kiss your hand , and so leave you . By this hand , Claudio shall render me a dear account . As you hear of me , so think of me . Go , comfort your cousin : I must say she is dead ; and so , farewell .


Is our whole dissembly appeared ?

O ! a stool and a cushion for the sexton .

Which be the malefactors ?

Marry , that am I and my partner .

Nay , that's certain : we have the exhibition to examine .

But which are the offenders that are to be examined ? let them come before Master constable .

Yea , marry , let them come before me .
What is your name , friend ?

Borachio .

Pray write down Borachio . Yours , sirrah ?

I am a gentleman , sir , and my name is Conrade .

Write down Master gentleman Conrade . Masters , do you serve God ?

Yea , sir , we hope .

Yea , sir , we hope .

Write down that they hope they serve God : and write God first ; for God defend but God should go before such villains ! Masters , it is proved already that you are little better than false knaves , and it will go near to be thought so shortly . How answer you for yourselves ?

Marry , sir , we say we are none .

A marvellous witty fellow , I assure you ; but I will go about with him . Come you hither , sirrah ; a word in your ear : sir , I say to you , it is thought you are false knaves .

Sir , I say to you we are none .

Well , stand aside . 'Fore God , they are both in a tale . Have you writ down , that they are none ?

Master constable , you go not the way to examine : you must call forth the watch that are their accusers .

Yea , marry , that's the eftest way . Let the watch come forth . Masters , I charge you , in the prince's name , accuse these men .

This man said , sir , that Don John , the prince's brother , was a villain .

Write down Prince John a villain .
Why , this is flat perjury , to call a prince's brother villain .

Master constable ,

Pray thee , fellow , peace : I do not like thy look , I promise thee .

What heard you him say else ?

Marry , that he had received a thousand ducats of Don John for accusing the Lady Hero wrongfully .

Flat burglary as ever was committed .

Yea , by the mass , that it is .

What else , fellow ?

And that Count Claudio did mean , upon his words , to disgrace Hero before the whole assembly , and not marry her .

O villain ! thou wilt be condemned into everlasting redemption for this .

What else ?

This is all .

And this is more , masters , than you can deny . Prince John is this morning secretly stolen away : Hero was in this manner accused , in this very manner refused , and , upon the grief of this , suddenly died . Master constable , let these men be bound , and brought to Leonato's : I will go before and show him their examination .


Come , let them be opinioned .

Let them be in the hands 

Off , coxcomb !

God's my life ! where's the sexton ? let him write down the prince's officer coxcomb . Come , bind them . Thou naughty varlet !

Away ! you are an ass ; you are an ass .

Dost thou not suspect my place ? Dost thou not suspect my years ? O that he were here to write me down an ass ! but , masters , remember that I am an ass ; though it be not written down , yet forget not that I am an ass . No , thou villain , thou art full of piety , as shall be proved upon thee by good witness . I am a wise fellow ; and , which is more , an officer ; and , which is more , a householder ; and , which is more , as pretty a piece of flesh as any in Messina ; and one that knows the law , go to ; and a rich fellow enough , go to ; and a fellow that hath had losses ; and one that hath two gowns , and everything handsome about him . Bring him away . O that I had been writ down an ass !

If you go on thus , you will kill yourself ;
And 'tis not wisdom thus to second grief 
Against yourself .

I pray thee , cease thy counsel ,
Which falls into mine ears as profitless 
As water in a sieve : give not me counsel ;
Nor let no comforter delight mine ear 
But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine :
Bring me a father that so lov'd his child ,
Whose joy of her is overwhelm'd like mine ,
And bid him speak of patience ;
Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine ,
And let it answer every strain for strain ,
As thus for thus and such a grief for such ,
In every lineament , branch , shape , and form :
If such a one will smile , and stroke his beard ;
Bid sorrow wag , cry 'hem' when he should groan ,
Patch grief with proverbs ; make misfortune drunk 
With candle-wasters ; bring him yet to me ,
And I of him will gather patience .
But there is no such man ; for , brother , men 
Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief 
Which they themselves not feel ; but , tasting it ,
Their counsel turns to passion , which before 
Would give preceptial medicine to rage ,
Fetter strong madness in a silken thread ,
Charm ache with air and agony with words .
No , no ; 'tis all men's office to speak patience 
To those that wring under the load of sorrow ,
But no man's virtue nor sufficiency 
To be so moral when he shall endure 
The like himself . Therefore give me no counsel :
My griefs cry louder than advertisement .

Therein do men from children nothing differ .

I pray thee , peace ! I will be flesh and blood ;
For there was never yet philosopher 
That could endure the toothache patiently ,
However they have writ the style of gods 
And made a push at chance and sufferance .

Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself ;
Make those that do offend you suffer too .

There thou speak'st reason : nay , I will do so .
My soul doth tell me Hero is belied ;
And that shall Claudio know ; so shall the prince ,
And all of them that thus dishonour her .

Here come the prince and Claudio hastily .


Good den , good den .

Good day to both of you .

Hear you , my lords ,

We have some haste , Leonato .

Some haste , my lord ! well , fare you well , my lord :
Are you so hasty now ?well , all is one .

Nay , do not quarrel with us , good old man .

If he could right himself with quarrelling ,
Some of us would lie low .

Who wrongs him ?

Marry , thou dost wrong me ; thou dissembler , thou .
Nay , never lay thy hand upon thy sword ;
I fear thee not .

Marry , beshrew my hand ,
If it should give your age such cause of fear .
In faith , my hand meant nothing to my sword .

Tush , tush , man ! never fleer and jest at me :
I speak not like a dotard nor a fool ,
As , under privilege of age , to brag 
What I have done being young , or what would do ,
Were I not old . Know , Claudio , to thy head ,
Thou hast so wrong'd mine innocent child and me 
That I am forc'd to lay my reverence by ,
And , with grey hairs and bruise of many days ,
Do challenge thee to trial of a man .
I say thou hast belied mine innocent child :
Thy slander hath gone through and through her heart ,
And she lies buried with her ancestors ;
O ! in a tomb where never scandal slept ,
Save this of hers , fram'd by thy villany !

My villany ?

Thine , Claudio ; thine , I say .

You say not right , old man .

My lord , my lord ,
I'll prove it on his body , if he dare ,
Despite his nice fence and his active practice ,
His May of youth and bloom of lustihood .

Away ! I will not have to do with you .

Canst thou so daff me ? Thou hast kill'd my child ;
If thou kill'st me , boy , thou shalt kill a man .

He shall kill two of us , and men indeed :
But that's no matter ; let him kill one first :
Win me and wear me ; let him answer me .
Come , follow me , boy ; come , sir boy , come , follow me .
Sir boy , I'll whip you from your foining fence ;
Nay , as I am a gentleman , I will .

Brother ,

Content yourself . God knows I lov'd my niece ;
And she is dead , slander'd to death by villains ,
That dare as well answer a man indeed 
As I dare take a serpent by the tongue .
Boys , apes , braggarts , Jacks , milksops !

Brother Antony ,

Hold you content . What , man ! I know them , yea ,
And what they weigh , even to the utmost scruple ,
Scrambling , out-facing , fashion-monging boys ,
That lie and cog and flout , deprave and slander ,
Go antickly , show outward hideousness ,
And speak off half a dozen dangerous words ,
How they might hurt their enemies , if they durst ;
And this is all !

But , brother Antony ,

Come , 'tis no matter :
Do not you meddle , let me deal in this .

Gentlemen both , we will not wake your patience .
My heart is sorry for your daughter's death ;
But , on my honour , she was charg'd with nothing 
But what was true and very full of proof .

My lord , my lord 

I will not hear you .

No ?
Come , brother , away . I will be heard .

And shall , or some of us will smart for it .

See , see ; here comes the man we went to seek .

Now , signior , what news ?

Good day , my lord .

Welcome , signior : you are almost come to part almost a fray .

We had like to have had our two noses snapped off with two old men without teeth .

Leonato and his brother . What thinkest thou ? Had we fought , I doubt we should have been too young for them .

In a false quarrel there is no true valour . I came to seek you both .

We have been up and down to seek thee ; for we are high-proof melancholy , and would fain have it beaten away . Wilt thou use thy wit ?

It is in my scabbard ; shall I draw it ?

Dost thou wear thy wit by thy side ?

Never any did so , though very many have been beside their wit . I will bid thee draw , as we do the minstrels ; draw , to pleasure us .

As I am an honest man , he looks pale . Art thou sick , or angry ?

What , courage , man ! What though care killed a cat , thou hast mettle enough in thee to kill care .

Sir , I shall meet your wit in the career , an you charge it against me . I pray you choose another subject .

Nay then , give him another staff : this last was broke cross .

By this light , he changes more and more : I think he be angry indeed .

If he be , he knows how to turn his girdle .

Shall I speak a word in your ear ?

God bless me from a challenge !

You are a villain ; I jest not : I will make it good how you dare , with what you dare , and when you dare . Do me right , or I will protest your cowardice . You have killed a sweet lady , and her death shall fall heavy on you . Let me hear from you .

Well I will meet you , so I may have good cheer .

What , a feast , a feast ?

I' faith , I thank him ; he hath bid me to a calf's-head and a capon , the which if I do not carve most curiously , say my knife's naught .
Shall I not find a woodcock too ?

Sir , your wit ambles well ; it goes easily .

I'll tell thee how Beatrice praised thy wit the other day . I said , thou hadst a fine wit . 'True ,' says she , 'a fine little one .' 'No ,' said I , 'a great wit .' 'Right ,' said she , 'a great gross one .' 'Nay ,' said I , 'a good wit .' 'Just ,' said she , 'it hurts nobody .' 'Nay ,' said I , 'the gentleman is wise .' 'Certain ,' said she , 'a wise gentleman .' 'Nay ,' said I , 'he hath the tongues .' 'That I believe ,' said she . 'for he swore a thing to me on Monday night , which he forswore on Tuesday morning : there's a double tongue ; there's two tongues .' Thus did she , an hour together , trans-shape thy particular virtues ; yet at last she concluded with a sigh , thou wast the properest man in Italy .

For the which she wept heartily and said she cared not .

Yea , that she did ; but yet , for all that , an if she did not hate him deadly , she would love him dearly . The old man's daughter told us all .

All , all ; and moreover , God saw him when he was hid in the garden .

But when shall we set the savage bull's horns on the sensible Benedick's head ?

Yea , and text underneath , 'Here dwells Benedick the married man !' 

Fare you well , boy : you know my mind . I will leave you now to your gossip-like humour : you break jests as braggarts do their blades , which , God be thanked , hurt not . My lord , for your many courtesies I thank you : I must discontinue your company . Your brother the bastard is fled from Messina : you have , among you , killed a sweet and innocent lady . For my Lord Lack-beard there , he and I shall meet ; and till then , peace be with him .


He is in earnest .

In most profound earnest ; and , I'll warrant you , for the love of Beatrice .

And hath challenged thee ?

Most sincerely .

What a pretty thing man is when he goes in his doublet and hose and leaves off his wit !

He is then a giant to an ape ; but then is an ape a doctor to such a man .

But , soft you ; let me be : pluck up , my heart , and be sad ! Did he not say my brother was fled ?


Come , you , sir : if justice cannot tame you , she shall ne'er weigh more reasons in her balance . Nay , an you be a cursing hypocrite once , you must be looked to .

How now ! two of my brother's men bound ! Borachio , one !

Hearken after their offence , my lord .

Officers , what offence have these men done ?

Marry , sir , they have committed false report ; moreover , they have spoken untruths ; secondarily , they are slanders ; sixth and lastly , they have belied a lady ; thirdly , they have verified unjust things ; and to conclude , they are lying knaves .

First , I ask thee what they have done ; thirdly , I ask thee what's their offence ; sixth and lastly , why they are committed ; and , to conclude , what you lay to their charge ?

Rightly reasoned , and in his own division ; and , by my troth , there's one meaning well suited .

Who have you offended , masters , that you are thus bound to your answer ? this learned constable is too cunning to be understood . What's your offence ?

Sweet prince , let me go no further to mine answer : do you hear me , and let this count kill me . I have deceived even your very eyes : what your wisdoms could not discover , these shallow fools have brought to light ; who , in the night overheard me confessing to this man how Don John your brother incensed me to slander the Lady Hero ; how you were brought into the orchard and saw me court Margaret in Hero's garments ; how you disgraced her , when you should marry her . My villany they have upon record ; which I had rather seal with my death than repeat over to my shame . The lady is dead upon mine and my master's false accusation ; and , briefly , I desire nothing but the reward of a villain .

Runs not this speech like iron through your blood ?

I have drunk poison whiles he utter'd it .

But did my brother set thee on to this ?

Yea ; and paid me richly for the practice of it .

He is compos'd and fram'd of treachery :
And fled he is upon this villany .

Sweet Hero ! now thy image doth appear 
In the rare semblance that I lov'd it first .

Come , bring away the plaintiffs : by this time our sexton hath reformed Signior Leonato of the matter . And masters , do not forget to specify , when time and place shall serve , that I am an ass .

Here , here comes Master Signior Leonato , and the sexton too .


Which is the villain ? Let me see his eyes ,
That , when I note another man like him ,
I may avoid him . Which of these is he ?

If you would know your wronger , look on me .

Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast kill'd 
Mine innocent child ?

Yea , even I alone .

No , not so , villain ; thou beliest thyself :
Here stand a pair of honourable men ;
A third is fled , that had a hand in it .
I thank you , princes , for my daughter's death 
Record it with your high and worthy deeds .
'Twas bravely done , if you bethink you of it .

I know not how to pray your patience ;
Yet I must speak . Choose your revenge yourself ;
Impose me to what penance your invention 
Can lay upon my sin : yet sinn'd I not 
But in mistaking .

By my soul , nor I :
And yet , to satisfy this good old man ,
I would bend under any heavy weight 
That he'll enjoin me to .

I cannot bid you bid my daughter live ;
That were impossible : but , I pray you both ,
Possess the people in Messina here 
How innocent she died ; and if your love 
Can labour aught in sad invention ,
Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb ,
And sing it to her bones : sing it to-night .
To-morrow morning come you to my house ,
And since you could not be my son-in-law ,
Be yet my nephew . My brother hath a daughter ,
Almost the copy of my child that's dead ,
And she alone is heir to both of us :
Give her the right you should have given her cousin ,
And so dies my revenge .

O noble sir ,
Your over-kindness doth wring tears from me !
I do embrace your offer ; and dispose 
For henceforth of poor Claudio .

To-morrow then I will expect your coming ;
To-night I take my leave . This naughty man 
Shall face to face be brought to Margaret ,
Who , I believe , was pack'd in all this wrong ,
Hir'd to it by your brother .

No , by my soul she was not ;
Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me ;
But always hath been just and virtuous 
In anything that I do know by her .

Moreover , sir ,which , indeed , is not under white and black ,this plaintiff here , the offender , did call me ass : I beseech you , let it be remembered in his punishment . And also , the watch heard them talk of one Deformed : they say he wears a key in his ear and a lock hanging by it , and borrows money in God's name , the which he hath used so long and never paid , that now men grow hard-hearted , and will lend nothing for God's sake . Pray you , examine him upon that point .

I thank thee for thy care and honest pains .

Your worship speaks like a most thankful and reverend youth , and I praise God for you .

There's for thy pains .

God save the foundation !

Go , I discharge thee of thy prisoner , and I thank thee .

I leave an arrant knave with your worship ; which I beseech your worship to corect yourself , for the example of others . God keep your worship ! I wish your worship well ; God restore you to health ! I humbly give you leave to depart , and if a merry meeting may be wished , God prohibit it ! Come , neighbour .


Until to-morrow morning , lords , farewell .

Farewell , my lords : we look for you to-morrow .

We will not fail .

To-night I'll mourn with Hero .


Bring you these fellows on . We'll talk with Margaret ,
How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow .


Pray thee , sweet Mistress Margaret , deserve well at my hands by helping me to the speech of Beatrice .

Will you then write me a sonnet in praise of my beauty ?

In so high a style , Margaret , that no man living shall come over it ; for , in most comely truth , thou deservest it .

To have no man come over me ! why , shall I always keep below stairs ?

Thy wit is as quick as the greyhound's mouth ; it catches .

And yours as blunt as the fencer's foils , which hit , but hurt not .

A most manly wit , Margaret ; it will not hurt a woman : and so , I pray thee , call Beatrice . I give thee the bucklers .

Give us the swords , we have bucklers of our own .

If you use them , Margaret , you must put in the pikes with a vice ; and they are dangerous weapons for maids .

Well , I will call Beatrice to you , who I think hath legs .

And therefore will come .


The god of love ,
That sits above ,
And knows me , and knows me ,
How pitiful I deserve ,

I mean , in singing ; but in loving , Leander the good swimmer , Troilus the first employer of pandars , and a whole book full of these quondam carpet-mongers , whose names yet run smoothly in the even road of a blank verse , why , they were never so truly turned over and over as my poor self , in love . Marry , I cannot show it in rime ; I have tried : I can find out no rime to 'lady' but 'baby ,' an innocent rime ; for 'scorn ,' 'horn ,' a hard rime ; for 'school ,' 'fool ,' a babbling rime ; very ominous endings : no , I was not born under a riming planet , nor I cannot woo in festival terms .

Sweet Beatrice , wouldst thou come when I called thee ?

Yea , signior ; and depart when you bid me .

O , stay but till then !

'Then' is spoken ; fare you well now : and yet , ere I go , let me go with that I came for ; which is , with knowing what hath passed between you and Claudio .

Only foul words ; and thereupon I will kiss thee .

Foul words is but foul wind , and foul wind is but foul breath , and foul breath is noisome ; therefore I will depart unkissed .

Thou hast frighted the word out of his right sense , so forcible is thy wit . But I must tell thee plainly , Claudio undergoes my challenge , and either I must shortly hear from him , or I will subscribe him a coward . And , I pray thee now , tell me , for which of my bad parts didst thou first fall in love with me ?

For them all together ; which maintained so politic a state of evil that they will not admit any good part to intermingle with them . But for which of my good parts did you first suffer love for me ?

'Suffer love ,' a good epithet ! I do suffer love indeed , for I love thee against my will .

In spite of your heart , I think . Alas , poor heart ! If you spite it for my sake , I will spite it for yours ; for I will never love that which my friend hates .

Thou and I are too wise to woo peaceably .

It appears not in this confession : there's not one wise man among twenty that will praise himself .

An old , an old instance , Beatrice , that lived in the time of good neighbours . If a man do not erect in this age his own tomb ere he dies , he shall live no longer in monument than the bell rings and the widow weeps .

And how long is that think you ?

Question : why , an hour in clamour and a quarter in rheum : therefore it is most expedient for the wise ,if Don Worm , his conscience , find no impediment to the contrary ,to be the trumpet of his own virtues , as I am to myself . So much for praising myself , who , I myself will bear witness , is praiseworthy . And now tell me , how doth your cousin ?

Very ill .

And how do you ?

Very ill too .

Serve God , love me , and mend . There will I leave you too , for here comes one in haste .


Madam , you must come to your uncle . Yonder's old coil at home : it is proved , my Lady Hero hath been falsely accused , the prince and Claudio mightily abused ; and Don John is the author of all , who is fled and gone . Will you come presently ?

Will you go hear this news , signior ?

I will live in thy heart , die in thy lap , and be buried in thy eyes ; and moreover I will go with thee to thy uncle's .


Is this the monument of Leonato ?

It is , my lord .

Done to death by slanderous tongues 
Was the Hero that here lies :
Death , in guerdon of her wrongs ,
Gives her fame which never dies .
So the life that died with shame 
Lives in doath with glorious fame .

Hang thou there upon the tomb ,
Praising her when I am dumb .
Now , music , sound , and sing your solemn hymn .

Pardon , goddess of the night ,
Those that slew thy virgin knight ;
For the which , with songs of woe ,
Round about her tomb they go .
Midnight , assist our moan ;
Help us to sigh and groan ,
Heavily , heavily :
Graves , yawn and yield your dead ,
Till death be uttered ,
Heavily , heavily .

Now , unto thy bones good night !
Yearly will I do this rite .

Good morrow , masters : put your torches out .
The wolves have prey'd ; and look , the gentle day ,
Before the wheels of Ph bus , round about 
Dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey .
Thanks to you all , and leave us : fare you well 

Good morrow , masters : each his several way .

Come , let us hence , and put on other weeds ;
And then to Leonato's we will go .

And Hymen now with luckier issue speed's ,
Than this for whom we render'd up this woe !


Did I not tell you she was innocent ?

So are the prince and Claudio , who accus'd her 
Upon the error that you heard debated :
But Margaret was in some fault for this ,
Although against her will , as it appears 
In the true course of all the question .

Well , I am glad that all things sort so well .

And so am I , being else by faith enforc'd 
To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it .

Well , daughter , and you gentlewomen all ,
Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves ,
And when I send for you , come hither mask'd :
The prince and Claudio promis'd by this hour 
To visit me .

You know your office , brother ;
You must be father to your brother's daughter ,
And give her to young Claudio .

Which I will do with confirm'd countenance .

Friar , I must entreat your pains , I think .

To do what , signior ?

To bind me , or undo me ; one of them .
Signior Leonato , truth it is , good signior ,
Your niece regards me with an eye of favour .

That eye my daughter lent her : 'tis most true .

And I do with an eye of love requite her .

The sight whereof I think , you had from me ,
From Claudio , and the prince . But what's your will ?

Your answer , sir , is enigmatical :
But , for my will , my will is your good will 
May stand with ours , this day to be conjoin'd 
In the state of honourable marriage :
In which , good friar , I shall desire your help .

My heart is with your liking .

And my help .
Here come the prince and Claudio .


Good morrow to this fair assembly .

Good morrow , prince ; good morrow , Claudio :
We here attend you . Are you yet determin'd 
To-day to marry with my brother's daughter ?

I'll hold my mind , were she an Ethiop .

Call her forth , brother : here's the friar ready .


Good morrow , Benedick . Why , what's the matter ,
That you have such a February face ,
So full of frost , of storm and cloudiness ?

I think he thinks upon the savage bull .
Tush ! fear not , man , we'll tip thy horns with gold ,
And all Europa shall rejoice at thee ,
As once Europa did at lusty Jove ,
When he would play the noble beast in love .

Bull Jove , sir , had an amiable low :
And some such strange bull leap'd your father's cow ,
And got a calf in that same noble feat ,
Much like to you , for you have just his bleat .

For this I owe you : here come other reckonings .

Which is the lady I must seize upon ?

This same is she , and I do give you her .

Why , then she's mine . Sweet , let me see your face .

No , that you shall not , till you take her hand 
Before this friar , and swear to marry her .

Give me your hand : before this holy friar ,
I am your husband , if you like of me .

And when I liv'd , I was your other wife :

And when you lov'd , you were my other husband .

Another Hero !

Nothing certainer :
One Hero died defil'd , but I do live ,
And surely as I live , I am a maid .

The former Hero ! Hero that is dead !

She died , my lord , but whiles her slander liv'd .

All this amazement can I qualify :
When after that the holy rites are ended ,
I'll tell you largely of fair Hero's death :
Meantime , let wonder seem familiar ,
And to the chapel let us presently .

Soft and fair , friar . Which is Beatrice ?

I answer to that name . What is your will ?

Do not you love me ?

Why , no ; no more than reason .

Why , then , your uncle and the prince and Claudio 
Have been deceived ; for they swore you did .

Do not you love me ?

Troth , no ; no more than reason .

Why , then , my cousin , Margaret , and Ursula ,
Are much deceiv'd ; for they did swear you did .

They swore that you were almost sick for me .

They swore that you were well-nigh dead for me .

'Tis no such matter . Then , you do not love me ?

No , truly , but in friendly recompense .

Come , cousin , I am sure you love the gentleman .

And I'll be sworn upon 't that he loves her ;
For here's a paper written in his hand ,
A halting sonnet of his own pure brain ,
Fashion'd to Beatrice .

And here's another ,
Writ in my cousin's hand , stolen from her pocket ,
Containing her affection unto Benedick .

A miracle ! here's our own hands against our hearts . Come , I will have thee ; but , by this light , I take thee for pity .

I would not deny you ; but , by this good day , I yield upon great persuasion , and partly to save your life , for I was told you were in a consumption .

Peace ! I will stop your mouth .


How dost thou , Benedick , the married man ?

I'll tell thee what , prince ; a college of witcrackers cannot flout me out of my humour . Dost thou think I care for a satire or an epigram ? No ; if a man will be beaten with brains , a' shall wear nothing handsome about him . In brief , since I do purpose to marry , I will think nothing to any purpose that the world can say against it ; and therefore never flout at me for what I have said against it , for man is a giddy thing , and this is my conclusion . For thy part , Claudio , I did think to have beaten thee ; but , in that thou art like to be my kinsman , live unbruised , and love my cousin .

I had well hoped thou wouldst have denied Beatrice , that I might have cudgelled thee out of thy single life , to make thee a double-dealer ; which , out of question , thou wilt be , if my cousin do not look exceeding narrowly to thee .

Come , come , we are friends . Let's have a dance ere we are married , that we may lighten our own hearts and our wives' heels .

We'll have dancing afterward .

First , of my word ; therefore play , music ! Prince , thou art sad ; get thee a wife , get thee a wife : there is no staff more reverend than one tipped with horn .


My lord , your brother John is ta'en in flight ,
And brought with armed men back to Messina .

Think not on him till to-morrow : I'll devise thee brave punishments for him . Strike up , pipers !

PERICLES, PRINCE OF TYRE

 
To sing a song that old was sung ,
From ashes ancient Gower is come ,
Assuming man's infirmities ,
To glad your ear , and please your eyes .
It hath been sung at festivals ,
On ember-eves , and holy-ales ;
And lords and ladies in their lives 
Have read it for restoratives :
The purchase is to make men glorious ;
Et bonum quo antiquius , eo melius .
If you , born in these latter times ,
When wit's more ripe , accept my rimes ,
And that to hear an old man sing 
May to your wishes pleasure bring ,
I life would wish , and that I might 
Waste it for you like taper-light .
This Antioch , then , Antiochus the Great 
Built up , this city , for his chiefest seat ,
The fairest in all Syria ,
I tell you what mine authors say :
This king unto him took a fere ,
Who died and left a female heir ,
So buxom , blithe , and full of face 
As heaven had lent her all his grace ;
With whom the father liking took ,
And her to incest did provoke .
Bad child , worse father ! to entice his own 
To evil should be done by none .
By custom what they did begin 
Was with long use account no sin .
The beauty of this sinful dame 
Made many princes thither frame ,
To seek her as a bed-fellow ,
In marriage-pleasures play-fellow :
Which to prevent , he made a law ,
To keep her still , and men in awe ,
That whoso ask'd her for his wife ,
His riddle told not , lost his life :
So for her many a wight did die ,
As yon grim looks do testify .
What now ensues , to the judgment of your eye 
I give , my cause who best can justify .


Young Prince of Tyre , you have at large receiv'd 
The danger of the task you undertake .

I have , Antiochus , and , with a soul 
Embolden'd with the glory of her praise ,
Think death no hazard in this enterprise .

Bring in our daughter , clothed like a bride ,
For the embracements even of Jove himself ;
At whose conception , till Lucina reign'd ,
Nature this dowry gave , to glad her presence ,
The senate-house of planets all did sit ,
To knit in her their best perfections .

See , where she comes apparell'd like the spring ,
Graces her subjects , and her thoughts the king 
Of every virtue gives renown to men !
Her face the book of praises , where is read 
Nothing but curious pleasures , as from thence 
Sorrow were ever raz'd , and testy wrath 
Could never be her mild companion .
You gods , that made me man , and sway in love ,
That hath inflam'd desire in my breast 
To taste the fruit of you celestial tree 
Or die in the adventure , be my helps ,
As I am son and servant to your will ,
To compass such a boundless happiness !

Prince Pericles ,

That would be son to great Antiochus .

Before thee stands this fair Hesperides ,
With golden fruit , but dangerous to be touch'd ;
For death-like dragons here affright thee hard :
Her face , like heaven , enticeth thee to view 
Her countless glory , which desert must gain ;
And which , without desert , because thine eye 
Presumes to reach , all thy whole heap must die .
Yon sometime famous princes , like thyself ,
Drawn by report , adventurous by desire ,
Tell thee with speechless tongues and semblance pale ,
That without covering , save yon field of stars ,
They here stand martyrs , slain in Cupid's wars ;
And with dead cheeks advise thee to desist 
For going on death's net , whom none resist .

Antiochus , I thank thee , who hath taught 
My frail mortality to know itself ,
And by those fearful objects to prepare 
This body , like to them , to what I must ;
For death remember'd should be like a mirror ,
Who tells us life's but breath , to trust it error .
I'll make my will then ; and as sick men do ,
Who know the world , see heaven , but feeling woe ,
Gripe not at earthly joys as erst they did :
So I bequeath a happy peace to you 
And all good men , as every prince should do ;
My riches to the earth from whence they came ,

But my unspotted fire of love to you .
Thus ready for the way of life or death ,
I wait the sharpest blow .

Scorning advice , read the conclusion then ;
Which read and not expounded , 'tis decreed ,
As these before thee thou thyself shalt bleed .

Of all say'd yet , mayst thou prove prosperous !
Of all say'd yet , I wish thee happiness !

Like a bold champion , I assume the lists ,
Nor ask advice of any other thought 
But faithfulness and courage .

I am no viper , yet I feed 
On mother's flesh which did me breed ;
I sought a husband , in which labour 
I found that kindness in a father .
He's father , son , and husband mild ,
I mother , wife , and yet his child .
How they may be , and yet in two ,
As you will live , resolve it you .

Sharp physic is the last : but , O you powers !
That give heaven countless eyes to view men's acts ,
Why cloud they not their sights perpetually ,
If this be true , which makes me pale to read it ?
Fair glass of light , I lov'd you , and could still ,
Were not this glorious casket stor'd with ill :
But I must tell you now my thoughts revolt ;
For he's no man on whom perfections wait 
That , knowing sin within , will touch the gate .
You're a fair viol , and your sense the strings ,
Who , finger'd to make men his lawful music ,
Would draw heaven down and all the gods to hearken ;
But being play'd upon before your time ,
Hell only danceth at so harsh a chime .
Good sooth , I care not for you .

Prince Pericles , touch not , upon thy life ,
For that's an article within our law ,
As dangerous as the rest . Your time's expir'd :
Either expound now or receive your sentence .

Great king ,
Few love to hear the sins they love to act ;
'Twould braid yourself too near for me to tell it .
Who has a book of all that monarchs do ,
He's more secure to keep it shut than shown ;
For vice repeated is like the wandering wind ,
Blows dust in others' eyes , to spread itself ;
And yet the end of all is bought thus dear ,
The breath is gone , and the sore eyes see clear 
To stop the air would hurt them . The blind mole casts 
Copp'd hills towards heaven , to tell the earth is throng'd 
By man's oppression ; and the poor worm doth die for 't .
Kings are earth's gods ; in vice their law's their will ;
And if Jove stray , who dares say Jove doth ill ?
It is enough you know ; and it is fit ,
What being more known grows worse , to smother it .
All love the womb that their first being bred ,
Then give my tongue like leave to love my head .

Heaven ! that I had thy head ; he has found the meaning ;
But I will gloze with him . Young Prince of Tyre ,
Though by the tenour of our strict edict ,
Your exposition misinterpreting ,
We might proceed to cancel of your days ;
Yet hope , succeeding from so fair a tree 
As your fair self , doth tune us otherwise :
Forty days longer we do respite you ;
If by which time our secret be undone ,
This mercy shows we'll joy in such a son :
And until then your entertain shall be 
As doth befit our honour and your worth .


How courtesy would seem to cover sin ,
When what is done is like a hypocrite ,
The which is good in nothing but in sight !
If it be true that I interpret false ,
Then were it certain you were not so bad 
As with foul incest to abuse your soul ;
Where now you're both a father and a son ,
By your untimely claspings with your child ,
Which pleasure fits a husband , not a father ;
And she an eater of her mother's flesh ,
By the defiling of her parent's bed ;
And both like serpents are , who though they feed 
On sweetest flowers , yet they poison breed .
Antioch , farewell ! for wisdom sees , those men 
Blush not in actions blacker than the night ,
Will shun no course to keep them from the light .
One sin , I know , another doth provoke ;
Murder's as near to lust as flame to smoke .
Poison and treason are the hands of sin ,
Ay , and the targets , to put off the shame :
Then , lest my life be cropp'd to keep you clear ,
By flight I'll shun the danger which I fear .

He hath found the meaning , for which we mean 
To take his head .
He must not live to trumpet forth my infamy ,
Nor tell the world Antiochus doth sin 
In such a loathed manner ;
And therefore instantly this prince must die ,
For by his fall my honour must keep high .
Who attends us there ?


Doth your highness call ?

Thaliard ,
You're of our chamber , and our mind partakes 
Her private actions to your secrecy ;
And for your faithfulness we will advance you .
Thaliard , behold , here's poison , and here's gold ;
We hate the Prince of Tyre , and thou must kill him :
It fits thee not to ask the reason why ,
Because we bid it . Say , is it done ?

My lord , 'tis done .

Enough .

Let your breath cool yourself , telling your haste .

My lord , Prince Pericles is fled .


As thou 
Wilt live , fly after ; and , as an arrow shot 
From a well-experienc'd archer hits the mark 
His eye doth level at , so thou ne'er return 
Unless thou say 'Prince Pericles is dead .' 

My lord ,
If I can get him within my pistol's length ,
I'll make him sure enough : so , farewell to your highness .

Thaliard , adieu !

Till Pericles be dead ,
My heart can lend no succour to my head .


Let none disturb us .
Why should this change of thoughts ,
The sad companion , dull-ey'd melancholy ,
Be my so us'd a guest , as not an hour 
In the day's glorious walk or peaceful night 
The tomb where grief should sleep can breed me quiet ?
Here pleasures court mine eyes , and mine eyes shun them ,
And danger , which I feared , is at Antioch ,
Whose arm seems far too short to hit me here ;
Yet neither pleasure's art can joy my spirits ,
Nor yet the other's distance comfort me .
Then it is thus : the passions of the mind ,
That have their first conception by mis-dread ,
Have after-nourishment and life by care ;
And what was first but fear what might be done ,
Grows elder now and cares it be not done .
And so with me : the great Antiochus ,
'Gainst whom I am too little to contend ,
Since he's so great can make his will his act ,
Will think me speaking , though I swear to silence ;
Nor boots it me to say I honour him ,
If he suspect I may dishonour him ;
And what may make him blush in being known ,
He'll stop the course by which it might be known .
With hostile forces he'll o'erspread the land ,
And with the ostent of war will look so huge ,
Amazement shall drive courage from the state ,
Our men be vanquish'd ere they do resist ,
And subjects punish'd that ne'er thought offence :
Which care of them , not pity of myself ,
Who am no more but as the tops of trees ,
Which fence the roots they grow by and defend them ,
Make both my body pine and soul to languish ,
And punish that before that he would punish .


Joy and all comfort in your sacred breast !

And keep your mind , till you return to us ,
Peaceful and comfortable .

Peace , peace ! and give experience tongue .
They do abuse the king that flatter him ;
For flattery is the bellows blows up sin ;
The thing the which is flatter'd , but a spark ,
To which that blast gives heat and stronger glowing ;
Whereas reproof , obedient and in order ,
Fits kings , as they are men , for they may err :
When Signior Sooth here does proclaim a peace ,
He flatters you , makes war upon your life .
Prince , pardon me , or strike me , if you please ;
I cannot be much lower than my knees .

All leave us else ; but let your cares o'erlook 
What shipping and what lading's in our haven ,
And then return to us .

Helicanus , thou 
Hast mov'd us ; what seest thou in our looks ?

An angry brow , dread lord .

If there be such a dart in prince's frowns ,
How durst thy tongue move anger to our face ?

How dare the plants look up to heaven , from whence 
They have their nourishment ?

Thou know'st I have power 
To take thy life from thee .

I have ground the axe myself ;
Do you but strike the blow .

Rise , prithee , rise ;
Sit down ; thou art no flatterer :
I thank thee for it ; and heaven forbid 
That kings should let their ears hear their faults hid !
Fit counsellor and servant for a prince ,
Who by thy wisdom mak'st a prince thy servant ,
What wouldst thou have me do ?

To bear with patience 
Such griefs as you yourself do lay upon yourself .

Thou speak'st like a physician , Helicanus ,
That minister'st a potion unto me 
That thou wouldst tremble to receive thyself .
Attend me then : I went to Antioch ,
Where as thou know'st , against the face of death 
I sought the purchase of a glorious beauty ,
From whence an issue I might propagate 
Are arms to princes and bring joys to subjects .
Her face was to mine eye beyond all wonder ;
The rest , hark in thine ear , as black as incest ;
Which by my knowledge found , the sinful father 
Seem'd not to strike , but smooth ; but thou know'st this ,
'Tis time to fear when tyrants seem to kiss .
Which fear so grew in me I hither fled ,
Under the covering of a careful night ,
Who seem'd my good protector ; and , being here ,
Bethought me what was past , what might succeed .
I knew him tyrannous ; and tyrants' fears 
Decrease not , but grow faster than the years .
And should he doubt it , as no doubt he doth ,
That I should open to the listening air 
How many worthy princes' bloods were shed ,
To keep his bed of blackness unlaid ope ,
To lop that doubt he'll fill this land with arms ,
And make pretence of wrong that I have done him ;
When all , for mine , if I may call 't , offence ,
Must feel war's blow , who spares not innocence :
Which love to all , of which thyself art one ,
Who now reprov'st me for it ,

Alas ! sir .

Drew sleep out of mine eyes , blood from my cheeks ,
Musings into my mind , with thousand doubts 
How I might stop this tempest , ere it came ;
And finding little comfort to relieve them ,
I thought it princely charity to grieve them .

Well , my lord , since you have given me leave to speak ,
Freely will I speak . Antiochus you fear ,
And justly too , I think , you fear the tyrant ,
Who either by public war or private treason 
Will take away your life .
Therefore , my lord , go travel for a while ,
Till that his rage and anger be forgot ,
Or till the Destinies do cut his thread of life .
Your rule direct to any ; if to me ,
Day serves not light more faithful than I'll be .

I do not doubt thy faith ;
But should he wrong my liberties in my absence ?

We'll mingle our bloods together in the earth ,
From whence we had our being and our birth .

Tyre , I now look from thee then , and to Tarsus 
Intend my travel , where I'll hear from thee ,
And by whose letters I'll dispose myself .
The care I had and have of subjects' good 
On thee I'll lay , whose wisdom's strength can bear it .
I'll take thy word for faith , not ask thine oath ;
Who shuns not to break one will sure crack both .
But in our orbs we'll live so round and safe ,
That time of both this truth shall ne'er convince ,
Thou show'dst a subject's shine , I a true prince .


So this is Tyre , and this the court . Here must I kill King Pericles ; and if I do not , I am sure to be hanged at home : 'tis dangerous . Well , I perceive he was a wise fellow , and had good discretion , that , being bid to ask what he would of the king , desired he might know none of his secrets : now do I see he had some reason for it ; for if a king bid a man be a villain , he is bound by the indenture of his oath to be one . Hush ! here come the lords of Tyre .


You shall not need , my fellow peers of Tyre ,
Further to question me of your king's departure :
His seal'd commission , left in trust with me ,
Doth speak sufficiently he's gone to travel .

How ! the king gone !

If further yet you will be satisfied ,
Why , as it were unlicens'd of your loves ,
He would depart , I'll give some light unto you .
Being at Antioch 

What from Antioch ?

Royal Antiochus on what cause I know not 
Took some displeasure at him , at least he judg'd so ;
And doubting lest that he had err'd or sinn'd ,
To show his sorrow he'd correct himself ;
So puts himself unto the shipman's toil ,
With whom each minute threatens life or death .

Well , I perceive 
I shall not be hang'd now , although I would ;
But since he's gone , the king it sure must please :
He 'scap'd the land , to perish at the sea .
I'll present myself .

Peace to the lords of Tyre .

Lord Thaliard from Antiochus is welcome .

From him I come ,
With message unto princely Pericles ;
But since my landing I have understood 
Your lord hath betook himself to unknown travels ,
My message must return from whence it came .

We have no reason to desire it ,
Commended to our master , not to us :
Yet , ere you shall depart , this we desire ,
As friends to Antioch , we may feast in Tyre .


My Dionyza , shall we rest us here ,
And by relating tales of others' griefs ,
See if 'twill teach us to forget our own ?

That were to blow at fire in hope to quench it ;
For who digs hills because they do aspire 
Throws down one mountain to cast up a higher .
O my distressed lord ! even such our griefs are ;
Here they're but felt , and seen with mischief's eyes ,
But like to groves , being topp'd , they higher rise .

O Dionyza ,
Who wanteth food , and will not say he wants it ,
Or can conceal his hunger till he famish ?
Our tongues and sorrows do sound deep 
Our woes into the air ; our eyes do weep 
Till tongues fetch breath that may proclaim them louder ;
That if heaven slumber while their creatures want ,
They may awake their helps to comfort them .
I'll then discourse our woes , felt several years ,
And wanting breath to speak help me with tears .

I'll do my best , sir .

This Tarsus , o'er which I have the government ,
A city on whom plenty held full hand ,
For riches strew'd herself even in the streets ;
Whose towers bore heads so high they kiss'd the clouds ,
And strangers ne'er beheld but wonder'd at ;
Whose men and dames so jetted and adorn'd ,
Like one another's glass to trim them by :
Their tables were stor'd full to glad the sight ,
And not so much to feed on as delight ;
All poverty was scorn'd , and pride so great ,
The name of help grew odious to repeat .

O ! 'tis too true ,

But see what heaven can do ! By this our change ,
These mouths , whom but of late earth , sea , and air 
Were all too little to content and please ,
Although they gave their creatures in abundance ,
As houses are defil'd for want of use ,
They are now starv'd for want of exercise ;
Those palates who , not yet two summers younger ,
Must have inventions to delight the taste ,
Would now be glad of bread , and beg for it ;
Those mothers who , to nousle up their babes ,
Thought nought too curious , are ready now 
To eat those little darlings whom they lov'd .
So sharp are hunger's teeth , that man and wife 
Draw lots who first shall die to lengthen life .
Here stands a lord , and there a lady weeping ;
Here many sink , yet those which see them fall 
Have scarce strength left to give them burial .
Is not this true ?

Our cheeks and hollow eyes do witness it .

O ! let those cities that of plenty's cup 
And her prosperities so largely taste ,
With their superfluous riots , hear these tears :
The misery of Tarsus may be theirs .


Where's the lord governor ?

Here .
Speak out thy sorrows which thou bring'st in haste ,
For comfort is too far for us to expect .

We have descried , upon our neighbouring shore ,
A portly sail of ships make hitherward .

I thought as much .
One sorrow never comes but brings an heir 
That may succeed as his inberitor ;
And so in ours . Some neighbouring nation ,
Taking advantage of our misery ,
Hath stuff'd these hollow vessels with their power ,
To beat us down , the which are down already ;
And make a conquest of unhappy me ,
Whereas no glory's got to overcome .

That's the least fear ; for by the semblance 
Of their white flags display'd , they bring us peace ,
And come to us as favourers , not as foes .

Thou speak'st like him 's untutor'd to repeat :
Who makes the fairest show means most deceit .
But bring they what they will and what they can ,
What need we fear ?
The ground's the lowest and we are half way there .
Go tell their general we attend him here ,
To know for what he comes , and whence he comes ,
And what he craves .

I go , my lord .


Welcome is peace if he on peace consist ;
If wars we are unable to resist .


Lord governor , for so we hear you are ,
Let not our ships and number of our men ,
Be like a beacon fir'd to amaze your eyes .
We have heard your miseries as far as Tyre ,
And seen the desolation of your streets :
Nor come we to add sorrow to your tears ,
But to relieve them of their heavy load ;
And these our ships , you happily may think 
Are like the Trojan horse was stuff'd within 
With bloody veins , expecting overthrow ,
Are stor'd with corn to make your needy bread ,
And give them life whom hunger starv'd half dead .

The gods of Greece protect you !
And we'll pray for you .

Arise , I pray you , rise :
We do not look for reverence , but for love ,
And harbourage for ourself , our ships , and men .

The which when any shall not gratify ,
Or pay you with unthankfulness in thought ,
Be it our wives , our children , or ourselves ,
The curse of heaven and men succeed their evils !
Till when the which , I hope , shall ne'er be seen 
Your Grace is welcome to our town and us .

Which welcome we'll accept ; feast here awhile ,
Until our stars that frown lend us a smile .

Here have you seen a mighty king 
His child , I wis , to incest bring ;
A better prince and benign lord ,
That will prove awful both in deed and word .
Be quiet , then , as men should be ,
Till he hath pass'd necessity .
I'll show you those in troubles reign ,
Losing a mite , a mountain gain .
The good in conversation ,
To whom I give my benison ,
Is still at Tarsus , where each man 
Thinks all is writ he speken can ;
And , to remember what he does ,
Build his statue to make him glorious :
But tidings to the contrary 
Are brought your eyes ; what need speak I ?


Good Helicane hath stay'd at home ,
Not to eat honey like a drone 
From others' labours ; for though he strive 
To killen bad , keep good alive ,
And to fulfil his prince' desire ,
Sends word of all that haps in Tyre :
How Thaliard came full bent with sin 
And had intent to murder him ;
And that in Tarsus was not best 
Longer for him to make his rest .
He , doing so , put forth to seas ,
Where when men been , there's seldom ease ;
For now the wind begins to blow ;
Thunder above and deeps below 
Make such unquiet , that the ship 
Should house him safe is wrack'd and split ;
And he , good prince , having all lost ,
By waves from coast to coast is tost .
All perishen of man , of pelf ,
Ne aught escapen but himself ;
Till Fortune , tir'd with doing bad ,
Threw him ashore , to give him glad ;
And here he comes . What shall be next ,
Pardon old Gower , this longs the text .

Yet cease your ire , you angry stars of heaven !
Wind , rain , and thunder , remember , earthly man 
Is but a substance that must yield to you ;
And I , as fits my nature , do obey you .
Alas ! the sea hath cast me on the rocks ,
Wash'd me from shore to shore , and left me breath 
Nothing to think on but ensuing death :
Let it suffice the greatness of your powers 
To have bereft a prince of all his fortunes ;
And having thrown him from your watery grave ,
Here to have death in peace is all he'll crave .


What , ho , Pilch !

Ha ! come and bring away the nets .

What , Patch-breech , I say !

What say you , master ?

Look how thou stirrest now ! come away , or I'll fetch thee with a wannion .

Faith , master , I am thinking of the poor men that were cast away before us even now .

Alas ! poor souls ; it grieved my heart to hear what pitiful cries they made to us to help them , when , well-a-day , we could scarce help ourselves .

Nay , master , said not I as much when I saw the porpus how he bounced and tumbled ? they say they're half fish half flesh ; a plague on them ! they ne'er come but I look to be washed . Master , I marvel how the fishes live in the sea .

Why , as men do a-land ; the great ones eat up the little ones ; I can compare our rich misers to nothing so fitly as to a whale ; a' plays and tumbles , driving the poor fry before him , and at last devours them all at a mouthful . Such whales have I heard on o' the land , who never leave gaping till they've swallowed the whole parish , church , steeple , bells , and all .

A pretty moral .

But master , if I had been the sexton , I would have been that day in the belfry .

Why , man ?

Because he should have swallowed me too ; and when I had been in his belly , I would have kept such a jangling of the bells , that he should never have left till he cast bells , steeple , church , and parish , up again . But if the good King Simonides were of my mind ,

Simonides !

We would purge the land of these drones , that rob the bee of her honey .

How from the finny subject of the sea 
These fishers tell the infirmities of men ;
And from their watery empire recollect 
All that may men approve or men detect !


Peace be at your labour , honest fishermen .

Honest ! good fellow , what's that ? if it be a day fits you , search out of the calendar , and nobody look after it .

Y' may see the sea hath cast me on your coast .

What a drunken knave was the sea , to cast thee in our way !

A man whom both the waters and the wind ,
In that vast tennis-court , have made the ball 
For them to play upon , entreats you pity him ;
He asks of you , that never us'd to beg .

No , friend , cannot you beg ? here's them in our country of Greece gets more with begging than we can do with working .

Canst thou catch any fishes then ?

I never practised it .

Nay then thou wilt starve , sure ; for here's nothing to be got now-a-days unless thou canst fish for 't .

What I have been I have forgot to know ,
But what I am want teaches me to think on ;
A man throng'd up with cold ; my veins are chill ,
And have no more of life than may suffice 
To give my tongue that heat to ask your help ;
Which if you shall refuse , when I am dead ,
For that I am a man , pray see me buried .

Die , quoth-a ? Now , gods forbid ! I have a gown here ; come , put it on ; keep thee warm . Now , afore me , a handsome fellow ! Come , thou shalt go home , and we'll have flesh for holidays , fish for fasting-days , and moreo'er puddings and flap-jacks ; and thou shalt be welcome .

I thank you , sir .

Hark you , my friend ; you said you could not beg .

I did but crave .

But crave ! Then I'll turn craver too , and so I shall 'scape whipping .

Why , are all your beggars whipped , then ?

O ! not all , my friend , not all ; for if all your beggars were whipped , I would wish no better office than to be beadle . But , master , I'll go draw up the net .


How well this honest mirth becomes their labour !

Hark you , sir ; do you know where ye are ?

Not well .

Why , I'll tell you : this is called Pentapolis , and our king the good Simonides .

The good King Simonides do you call him ?

Ay , sir ; and he deserves to be so called for his peaceable reign and good government .

He is a happy king , since he gains from his subjects the name of good by his government . How far is his court distant from this shore ?

Marry , sir , half a day's journey ; and I'll tell you , he hath a fair daughter , and to-morrow is her birthday ; and there are princes and knights come from all parts of the world to just and tourney for her love .

Were my fortunes equal to my desires , I could wish to make one there .

O ! sir , things must be as they may ; and what a man cannot get , he may lawfully deal for his wife's soul ,


Help , master , help ! here's a fish hangs in the net , like a poor man's right in the law ; 'twill hardly come out . Ha ! bots on 't , 'tis come at last , and 'tis turned to a rusty armour .

An armour , friends ! I pray you , let me see it .
Thanks , Fortune , yet , that after all my crosses 
Thou giv'st me somewhat to repair myself ;
And though it was mine own , part of mine heritage ,
Which my dead father did bequeath to me ,
With this strict charge , even as he left his life ,
'Keep it , my Pericles , it hath been a shield 
'Twixt me and death ;' and pointed to this brace ;
'For that it sav'd me , keep it ; in like necessity 
The which the gods protect thee from !'t may defend thee .' 
It kept where I kept , I so dearly lov'd it ;
Till the rough seas , that spare not any man ,
Took it in rage , though calm'd they have given 't again .
I thank thee for 't ; my shipwrack now 's no ill ,
Since I have here my father's gift in 's will .

What mean you , sir ?

To beg of you , kind friends , this coat of worth ,
For it was sometime target to a king ;
I know it by this mark . He lov'd me dearly ,
And for his sake I wish the having of it ;
And that you'd guide me to your sovereign's court ,
Where with it I may appear a gentleman ;
And if that ever my low fortunes better ,
I'll pay your bounties ; till then rest your debtor .

Why , wilt thou tourney for the lady ?

I'll show the virtue I have borne in arms .

Why , do'e take it ; and the gods give thee good on 't !

Ay , but hark you , my friend ; 'twas we that made up this garment through the rough seams of the water ; there are certain condolements , certain vails . I hope , sir , if you thrive , you'll remember from whence you had it .

Believe it , I will .
By your furtherance I am cloth'd in steel ;
And spite of all the rapture of the sea ,
This jewel holds his biding on my arm :
Unto thy value will I mount myself 
Upon a courser , whose delightful steps 
Shall make the gazer joy to see him tread .
Only , my friend , I yet am unprovided 
Of a pair of bases .

We'll sure provide ; thou shalt have my best gown to make thee a pair , and I'll bring thee to the court myself .

Then honour be but a goal to my will ! This day I'll rise , or else add ill to ill .

Are the knights ready to begin the triumph ?

They are , my liege ;
And stay your coming to present themselves .

Return them , we are ready ; and our daughter ,
In honour of whose birth these triumphs are ,
Sits here , like beauty's child , whom nature gat 
For men to see , and seeing wonder at .


It pleaseth you , my royal father , to express 
My commendations great , whose merit's less .

'Tis fit it should be so ; for princes are 
A model , which heaven makes like to itself :
As jewels lose their glory if neglected ,
So princes their renowns if not respected .
'Tis now your honour , daughter , to explain 
The labour of each knight in his device .

Which , to preserve mine honour , I'll perform .


Who is the first that doth prefer himself ?

A knight of Sparta , my renowned father ;
And the device he bears upon his shield 
Is a black Ethiop reaching at the sun ;
The word , Lux tua vita mihi .

He loves you well that holds his life of you .

Who is the second that presents himself ?

A prince of Macedon , my royal father ;
And the device he bears upon his shield 
Is an arm'd knight that's conquer'd by a lady ;
The motto thus , in Spanish , Piu por dulzura que por fuerza .


And what's the third ?

The third of Antioch ;
And his device , a wreath of chivalry ;
The word , Me pomp  provexit apex .


What is the fourth ?

A burning torch that's turned upside down ;
The word , Quod me alit me extinguit .

Which shows that beauty hath his power and will ,
Which can as well inflame as it can kill .


The fifth , a hand environed with clouds ,
Holding out gold that's by the touchstone tried ;
The motto thus , Sic spectanda fides .


And what 's 
The sixth and last , the which the knight himself 
With such a graceful courtesy deliver'd ?

He seems to be a stranger ; but his present is 
A wither'd branch , that's only green at top ;
The motto , In hac spe vivo .

A pretty moral ;
From the dejected state wherein he is ,
He hopes by you his fortune yet may flourish .

He had need mean better than his outward show 
Can any way speak in his just commend ;
For , by his rusty outside he appears 
To have practis'd more the whipstock than the lance .

He well may be a stranger , for he comes 
To an honour'd triumph strangely furnished .

And on set purpose let his armour rust 
Until this day , to scour it in the dust .

Opinion's but a fool , that makes us scan 
The outward habit by the inward man .
But stay , the knights are coming ; we'll withdraw 
Into the gallery .


Knights ,
To say you're welcome were superfluous .
To place upon the volume of your deeds ,
As in a title-page , your worth in arms ,
Were more than you expect , or more than's fit ,
Since every worth in show commends itself .
Prepare for mirth , for mirth becomes a feast :
You are princes and my guests .

But you , my knight and guest ;
To whom this wreath of victory I give ,
And crown you king of this day's happiness .

'Tis more by fortune , lady , than by merit .

Call it by what you will , the day is yours ;
And here , I hope , is none that envies it .
In framing an artist art hath thus decreed ,
To make some good , but others to exceed ;
And you're her labour'd scholar . Come , queen o' the feast ,
For , daughter , so you are ,here take your place ;
Marshal the rest , as they deserve their grace .

We are honour'd much by good Simonides .

Your presence glads our days ; honour we love ,
For who hates honour , hates the gods above .

Sir , yonder is your place .

Some other is more fit .

Contend not , sir ; for we are gentlemen 
That neither in our hearts nor outward eyes 
Envy the great nor do the low despise .

You are right courteous knights .

Sit , sir ; sit .

By Jove , I wonder , that is king of thoughts ,
These cates resist me , she but thought upon .

By Juno , that is queen of marriage ,
All viands that I eat do seem unsavoury ,
Wishing him my meat . Sure , he's a gallant gentleman .

He's but a country gentleman ;
He has done no more than other knights have done ;
He has broken a staff or so ; so let it pass .

To me he seems like diamond to glass .

Yon king's to me like to my father's picture ,
Which tells me in that glory once he was ;
Had princes sit , like stars , about his throne ,
And he the sun for them to reverence .
None that beheld him , but like lesser lights 
Did vail their crowns to his supremacy ;
Where now his son's like a glow-worm in the night ,
The which hath fire in darkness , none in light :
Whereby I see that Time's the king of men ;
He's both their parent , and he is their grave ,
And gives them what he will , not what they crave .

What , are you merry , knights ?

Who can be other in this royal presence ?

Here , with a cup that's stor'd unto the brim ,
As you do love , fill to your mistress' lips ,
We drink this health to you .

We thank your Grace .

Yet pause awhile ;
Yon knight doth sit too melancholy ,
As if the entertainment in our court 
Had not a show might countervail his worth .
Note it not you , Thaisa ?

What is it 
To me , my father ?

O ! attend , my daughter :
Princes in this should live like gods above ,
Who freely give to every one that comes 
To honour them ;
And princes not doing so are like to gnats ,
Which make a sound , but kill'd are wonder'd at .
Therefore to make his entrance more sweet ,
Here say we drink this standing-bowl of wine to him .

Alas ! my father , it befits not me 
Unto a stranger knight to be so bold ;
He may my proffer take for an offence ,
Since men take women's gifts for impudence .

How !
Do as I bid you , or you'll move me else .

Now , by the gods , he could not please me better .

And further tell him , we desire to know of him ,
Of whence he is , his name , and parentage .

The king , my father , sir , has drunk to you .

I thank him .

Wishing it so much blood unto your life .

I thank both him and you , and pledge him freely .

And further he desires to know of you ,
Of whence you are , your name and parentage .

A gentleman of Tyre , my name , Pericles ;
My education been in arts and arms ;
Who , looking for adventures in the world ,
Was by the rough seas reft of ships and men ,
And after shipwrack , driven upon this shore .

He thanks your Grace ; names himself Pericles ,
A gentleman of Tyre ,
Who only by misfortune of the seas 
Bereft of ships and men , cast on this shore .

Now , by the gods , I pity his misfortune ,
And will awake him from his melancholy .
Come , gentlemen , we sit too long on trifles ,
And waste the time which looks for other revels .
Even in your armours , as you are address'd ,
Will very well become a soldier's dance .
I will not have excuse , with saying this 
Loud music is too harsh for ladies' heads 
Since they love men in arms as well as beds .

So this was well ask'd , 'twas so well perform'd .
Come , sir ;
Here is a lady that wants breathing too :
And I have often heard , you knights of Tyre 
Are excellent in making ladies trip ,
And that their measures are as excellent .

In those that practise them they are , my lord .

O ! that's as much as you would be denied 
Of your fair courtesy .

Unclasp , unclasp ;
Thanks , gentlemen , to all ; all have done well ,


But you the best . Pages and lights , to conduct 
These knights unto their several lodgings ! Yours , sir ,
We have given order to be next our own .

I am at your Grace's pleasure .

Princes , it is too late to talk of love ,
And that's the mark I know you level at ;
Therefore each one betake him to his rest ;
To-morrow all for speeding do their best .


No , Escanes , know this of me ,
Antiochus from incest liv'd not free ;
For which , the most high gods not minding longer 
To withhold the vengeance that they had in store ,
Due to this heinous capital offence ,
Even in the height and pride of all his glory ,
When he was seated in a chariot 
Of an inestimable value , and his daughter with him ,
A fire from heaven came and shrivell'd up 
Their bodies , even to loathing ; for they so stunk ,
That all those eyes ador'd them ere their fall 
Scorn now their hand should give them burial .

'Twas very strange .

And yet but just ; for though 
This king were great , his greatness was no guard 
To bar heaven's shaft , but sin had his reward .

'Tis very true .


See , not a man in private conference 
Or council has respect with him but he .

It shall no longer grieve without reproof .

And curs'd be he that will not second it .

Follow me then . Lord Helicane , a word .

With me ? and welcome . Happy day , my lords .

Know that our griefs are risen to the top ,
And now at length they overflow their banks .

Your griefs ! for what ? wrong not the prince you love .

Wrong not yourself then , noble Helicane ;
But if the prince do live , let us salute him ,
Or know what ground's made happy by his breath .
If in the world he live , we'll seek him out ;
If in his grave he rest , we'll find him there ;
And be resolv'd he lives to govern us ,
Or dead , give 's cause to mourn his funeral ,
And leaves us to our free election .

Whose death's indeed the strongest in our censure :
And knowing this kingdom is without a head ,
Like goodly buildings left without a roof 
Soon fall to ruin , your noble self ,
That best know'st how to rule and how to reign ,
We thus submit unto , our sovereign .

Live , noble Helicane !

For honour's cause forbear your suffrages :
If that you love Prince Pericles , forbear .
Take I your wish , I leap into the seas ,
Where's hourly trouble for a minute's ease .
A twelvemonth longer , let me entreat you 
To forbear the absence of your king ;
If in which time expir'd he not return ,
I shall with aged patience bear your yoke .
But if I cannot win you to this love ,
Go search like nobles , like noble subjects ,
And in your search spend your adventurous worth ;
Whom if you find , and win unto return ,
You shall like diamonds sit about his crown .

To wisdom he's a fool that will not yield ;
And since Lord Helicane enjoineth us ,
We with our travels will endeavour it .

Then you love us , we you , and we'll clasp hands :
When peers thus knit , a kingdom ever stands .


Good morrow to the good Simonides .

Knights , from my daughter this I let you know ,
That for this twelvemonth she'll not undertake 
A married life .
Her reason to herself is only known ,
Which yet from her by no means can I get .

May we not get access to her , my lord ?

Faith , by no means ; she hath so strictly tied 
Her to her chamber that 'tis impossible .
One twelve moons more she'll wear Diana's livery ;
This by the eye of Cynthia hath she vow'd ,
And on her virgin honour will not break it .

Though loath to bid farewell , we take our leaves .


So ,
They're well dispatch'd ; now to my daughter's letter .
She tells me here , she'll wed the stranger knight ,
Or never more to view nor day nor light .
'Tis well , mistress ; your choice agrees with mine ;
I like that well : how absolute she's in 't ,
Not minding whether I dislike or no !
Well , I do commend her choice ;
And will no longer have it be delay'd .
Soft ! here he comes : I must dissemble it .


All fortune to the good Simonides !

To you as much , sir ! I am beholding to you 
For your sweet music this last night : I do 
Protest my ears were never better fed 
With such delightful pleasing harmony 

It is your Grace's pleasure to commend ,
Not my desert .

Sir , you are music's master .

The worst of all her scholars , my good lord .

Let me ask you one thing .
What do you think of my daughter , sir ?

A most virtuous princess .

And she is fair too , is she not ?

As a fair day in summer ; wondrous fair .

My daughter , sir , thinks very well of you ;
Ay , so well , that you must be her master ,
And she will be your scholar : therefore look to it .

I am unworthy for her schoolmaster .

She thinks not so ; peruse this writing else .

What's here ?
A letter that she loves the knight of Tyre !
'Tis the king's subtilty to have my life .
O ! seek not to entrap me , gracious lord ,
A stranger and distressed gentleman ,
That never aim'd so high to love your daughter ,
But bent all offices to honour her .

Thou hast bewitch'd my daughter , and thou art 
A villain .

By the gods , I have not :
Never did thought of mine levy offence ;
Nor never did my actions yet commence 
A deed might gain her love or your displeasure .

Traitor , thou liest .

Traitor !

Ay , traitor .

Even in his throat , unless it be the king ,
That calls me traitor , I return the lie .

Now , by the gods , I do applaud his courage .

My actions are as noble as my thoughts ,
That never relish'd of a base descent .
I came unto your court for honour's cause ,
And not to be a rebel to her state ;
And he that otherwise accounts of me ,
This sword shall prove he's honour's enemy .

No ?
Here comes my daughter , she can witness it .


Then , as you are as virtuous as fair ,
Resolve your angry father , if my tongue 
Did e'er solicit , or my hand subscribe 
To any syllable that made love to you .

Why , sir , say if you had ,
Who takes offence at that would make me glad ?

Yea , mistress , are you so peremptory ?


I am glad on 't , with all my heart .
I'll tame you ; I'll bring you in subjection .
Will you , not having my consent ,
Bestow your love and your affections 
Upon a stranger ?

who , for aught I know ,
May be , nor can I think the contrary ,
As great in blood as I myself .


Therefore , hear you , mistress ; either frame 
Your will to mine ; and you , sir , hear you ,
Either be rul'd by me , or I will make you 
Man and wife :
Nay , come , your hands and lips must seal it too ;
And being join'd , I'll thus your hopes destroy ;
And for a further grief ,God give you joy !
What ! are you both pleas'd ?

Yes , if you love me , sir .

Even as my life , or blood that fosters it .

What ! are you both agreed ?

Yes , if 't please your majesty .

Yes , if 't please your majesty .

It pleaseth me so well , that I will see you wed ;
Then with what haste you can get you to bed .

Now sleep yslaked hath the rout ;
No din but snores the house about ,
Made louder by the o'er-fed breast 
Of this most pompous marriage-feast .
The cat , with eyne of burning coal ,
Now couches fore the mouse's hole ;
And crickets sing at the oven's mouth ,
E'er the blither for their drouth .
Hymen hath brought the bride to bed ,
Where , by the loss of maidenhead ,
A babe is moulded . Be attent ;
And time that is so briefly spent 
With your fine fancies quaintly eche ;
What's dumb in show I'll plain with speech .


By many a dern and painful perch ,
Of Pericles the careful search 
By the four opposing coigns ,
Which the world together joins ,
Is made with all due diligence 
That horse and sail and high expense ,
Can stead the quest . At last from Tyre ,
Fame answering the most strange inquire 
To the court of King Simonides 
Are letters brought , the tenour these :
Antiochus and his daughter dead ;
The men of Tyrus on the head 
Of Helicanus would set on 
The crown of Tyre , but he will none :
The mutiny he there hastes t' oppress ;
Says to 'em , if King Pericles 
Come not home in twice six moons ,
He , obedient to their dooms ,
Will take the crown . The sum of this ,
Brought hither to Pentapolis ,
Yravished the regions round ,
And every one with claps can sound ,
'Our heir-apparent is a king !
Who dream'd , who thought of such a thing ?' 
Brief , he must hence depart to Tyre :
His queen , with child , makes her desire ,
Which who shall cross ?along to go ;
Omit we all their dole and woe :
Lychorida , her nurse , she takes ,
And so to sea . Their vessel shakes 
On Neptune's billow ; half the flood 
Hath their keel cut : but Fortune's mood 
Varies again ; the grisled north 
Disgorges such a tempest forth ,
That , as a duck for life that dives ,
So up and down the poor ship drives .
The lady shrieks , and well-a-near 
Does fall in travail with her fear ;
And what ensues in this fell storm 
Shall for itself itself perform .
I nill relate , action may 
Conveniently the rest convey ,
Which might not what by me is told .
In your imagination hold 
This stage the ship , upon whose deck 
The sea-tost Pericles appears to speak .

Thou God of this great vast , rebuke these surges ,
Which wash both heaven and hell ; and thou , that hast 
Upon the winds command , bind them in brass ,
Having call'd them from the deep . O ! still 
Thy deafening , dreadful thunders ; gently quench 
Thy nimble , sulphurous flashes . O ! how Lychorida ,
How does my queen ? Thou stormest venomously ;
Wilt thou spit all thyself ? The seaman's whistle 
Is as a whisper in the ears of death ,
Unheard . Lychorida ! Lucina , O !
Divinest patroness , and midwife gentle 
To those that cry by night , convey thy deity 
Aboard our dancing boat ; make swift the pangs 
Of my queen's travails !

Now , Lychorida !

Here is a thing too young for such a place ,
Who , if it had conceit , would die , as I 
Am like to do : take in your arms this piece 
Of your dead queen .

How , how , Lychorida !

Patience , good sir ; do not assist the storm .
Here's all that is left living of your queen ,
A little daughter : for the sake of it ,
Be manly , and take comfort .

O you gods !
Why do you make us love your goodly gifts ,
And snatch them straight away ? We here below ,
Recall not what we give , and therein may 
Use honour with you .

Patience , good sir ,
Even for this charge .

Now , mild may be thy life !
For a more blust'rous birth had never babe :
Quiet and gentle thy conditions !
For thou art the rudeliest welcome to this world 
That e'er was prince's child . Happy what follows !
Thou hast as chiding a nativity 
As fire , air , water , earth , and heaven can make ,
To herald thee from the womb ; even at the first 
Thy loss is more than can thy portage quit ,
With all thou canst find here . Now , the good gods 
Throw their best eyes upon 't !


What courage , sir ? God save you !

Courage enough . I do not fear the flaw ;
It hath done to me the worst . Yet for the love 
Of this poor infant , this fresh-new sea-farer ,
I would it would be quiet .

Slack the bolins there ! thou wilt not , wilt thou ? Blow , and split thyself .

But sea-room , an the brine and cloudy billow kiss the moon , I care not .

Sir , you queen must overboard : the sea works high , the wind is loud , and will not lie till the ship be cleared of the dead .

That's your superstition .

Pardon us , sir ; with us at sea it hath been still observed , and we are strong in custom . Therefore briefly yield her , for she must overboard straight .

As you think meet . Most wretched queen !

Here she lies , sir .

A terrible child-bed hast thou had , my dear ;
No light , no fire : the unfriendly elements 
Forgot thee utterly ; nor have I time 
To give thee hallow'd to thy grave , but straight 
Must cast thee , scarcely coffin'd , in the ooze ;
Where , for a monument upon thy bones ,
And aye-remaining lamps , the belching whale 
And humming water must o'erwhelm thy corpse ,
Lying with simple shells ! O Lychorida !
Bid Nestor bring me spices , ink and paper ,
My casket and my jewels ; and bid Nicander 
Bring me the satin coffer : lay the babe 
Upon the pillow . Hie thee , whiles I say 
A priestly farewell to her : suddenly , woman .


Sir , we have a chest beneath the hatches , caulk'd and bitumed ready .

I thank thee . Mariner , say what coast is this ?

We are near Tarsus .

Thither , gentle mariner ,
Alter thy course for Tyre . When canst thou reach it ?

By break of day , if the wind cease .

O ! make for Tarsus .
There will I visit Cleon , for the babe 
Cannot hold out to Tyrus ; there I'll leave it 
At careful nursing . Go thy ways , good mariner ;
I'll bring the body presently .


Philemon , ho !


Doth my lord call ?

Get fire and meat for these poor men ;
'T has been a turbulent and stormy night .

I have been in many ; but such a night as this 
Till now I ne'er endur'd .

Your master will be dead ere you return ;
There's nothing can be minister'd to nature 
That can recover him .

Give this to the 'pothecary ,
And tell me how it works .

Good morrow , sir .

Good morrow to your lordship .

Gentlemen ,
Why do you stir so early ?

Sir ,
Our lodgings , standing bleak upon the sea ,
Shook as the earth' did quake ;
The very principals did seem to rend ,
And all to topple . Pure surprise and fear 
Made me to quit the house .

That is the cause we trouble you so early ;
'Tis not our husbandry .

O ! you say well .

But I much marvel that your lordship , having 
Rich tire about you , should at these early hours 
Shake off the golden slumber of repose .
'Tis most strange ,
Nature should be so conversant with pain ,
Being thereto not compell'd .

I hold it ever ,
Virtue and cunning were endowments greater 
Than nobleness and riches ; careless heirs 
May the two latter darken and expend ,
But immortality attends the former ,
Making a man a god . 'Tis known I ever 
Have studied physic , through which secret art ,
By turning o'er authorities , I have 
Together with my practice made familiar 
To me and to my aid the blest infusions 
That dwell in vegetives , in metals , stones ;
And can speak of the disturbances 
That nature works , and of her cures ; which doth give me 
A more content in course of true delight 
Than to be thirsty after tottering honour ,
Or tie my treasure up in silken bags ,
To please the fool and death .

Your honour has through Ephesus pour'd forth 
Your charity , and hundreds call themselves 
Your creatures , who by you have been restor'd :
And not your knowledge , your personal pain , but even 
Your purse , still open , hath built Lord Cerimon 
Such strong renown as time shall ne'er decay .


So ; lift there .

What is that ?

Sir , even now 
Did the sea toss upon our shore this chest :
'Tis of some wrack .

Set it down ; let's look upon 't .

'Tis like a coffin , sir .

Whate'er it be ,
'Tis wondrous heavy . Wrench it open straight ;
If the sea's stomach be o'ercharg'd with gold ,
'Tis a good constraint of fortune it belches upon us .

'Tis so , my lord .

How close 'tis caulk'd and bitumed !
Did the sea cast it up ?

I never saw so huge a billow , sir ,
As toss'd it upon shore .

Come , wrench it open .
Soft ! it smells most sweetly in my sense .

A delicate odour .

As ever hit my nostril . So , up with it .
O you most potent gods ! what's here ? a corse !

Most strange !

Shrouded in cloth of state ; balm'd and entreasur'd 
With full bags of spices ! A passport too !
Apollo , perfect me i' the characters !

Here I give to understand ,
If e'er this coffin drive a-land ,
I , King Pericles , have lost 
This queen worth all our mundane cost .
Who finds her , give her burying ;
She was the daughter of a king :
Besides this treasure for a fee ,
The gods requite his charity !

If thou liv'st , Pericles , thou hast a heart 
That even cracks for woe ! This chanc'd to-night .

Most likely , sir .

Nay , certainly to-night ;
For look , how fresh she looks . They were too rough 
That threw her in the sea . Make fire within ;
Fetch hither all the boxes in my closet .

Death may usurp on nature many hours ,
And yet the fire of life kindle again 
The overpress'd spirits . I heard 
Of an Egyptian , that had nine hours lien dead ,
Who was by good appliances recovered .


Well said , well said ; the fire and cloths .
The rough and woeful music that we have ,
Cause it to sound , beseech you .
The viol once more ;how thou stirr'st , thou block !
The music there ! I pray you , give her air .
Gentlemen ,
This queen will live ; nature awakes , a warmth 
Breathes out of her ; she hath not been entranc'd 
Above five hours . See ! how she 'gins to blow 

Into life's flower again .

The heavens 
Through you increase our wonder and set up 
Your fame for ever .

She is alive ! behold ,
Her eyelids , cases to those heavenly jewels 
Which Pericles hath lost ,
Begin to part their fringes of bright gold ;
The diamonds of a most praised water 
Do appear , to make the world twice rich . Live ,
And make us weep to hear your fate , fair creature ,
Rare as you seem to be !


O dear Diana !
Where am I ? Where's my lord ? What world is this ?

Is not this strange ?

Most rare .

Hush , gentle neighbours !
Lend me your hands ; to the next chamber bear her .
Get linen ; now this matter must be look'd to ,
For her relapse is mortal , Come , come ;
And  sculapius guide us !


Most honour'd Cleon , I must needs be gone ;
My twelve months are expir'd , and Tyrus stands 
In a litigious peace . You and your lady 
Take from my heart all thankfulness ; the gods 
Make up the rest upon you !

Your shafts of fortune , though they hurt you mortally ,
Yet glance full wanderingly on us .

O your sweet queen !
That the strict fates had pleas'd you had brought her hither ,
To have bless'd mine eyes with her !

We cannot but obey 
The powers above us . Could I rage and roar 
As doth the sea she lies in , yet the end 
Must be as 'tis . My gentle babe Marina whom ,
For she was born at sea , I have nam'd so here 
I charge your charity withal , and leave her 
The infant of your care , beseeching you 
To give her princely training , that she may be 
Manner'd as she is born .

Fear not , my lord , but think 
Your Grace , that fed my country with your corn 
For which the people's prayers still fall upon you 
Must in your child be thought on . If neglection 
Should therein make me vile , the common body ,
By you reliev'd , would force me to my duty ;
But if to that my nature need a spur ,
The gods revenge it upon me and mine ,
To the end of generation !

I believe you ;
Your honour and your goodness teach me to 't ,
Without your vows . Till she be married , madam ,
By bright Diana , whom we honour , all 
Unscissar'd shall this hair of mine remain ,
Though I show ill in 't . So I take my leave .
Good madam , make me blessed in your care 
In bringing up my child .

I have one myself ,
Who shall not be more dear to my respect 
Than yours , my lord .

Madam , my thanks and prayers .

We'll bring your Grace e'en to the edge o' the shore ;
Then give you up to the mask'd Neptune and 
The gentlest winds of heaven .

I will embrace 
Your offer . Come , dearest madam . O ! no tears ,
Lychorida , no tears :
Look to your little mistress , on whose grace 
You may depend hereafter . Come , my lord .


Madam , this letter , and some certain jewels ,
Lay with you in your coffer ; which are now 
At your command . Know you the character ?

It is my lord's .
That I was shipp'd at sea , I well remember ,
Even on my eaning time ; but whether there 
Deliver'd , by the holy gods ,
I cannot rightly say . But since King Pericles ,
My wedded lord , I ne'er shall see again ,
A vestal livery will I take me to ,
And never more have joy .

Madam , if this you purpose as you speak ,
Diana's temple is not distant far ,
Where you may abide till your date expire .
Moreover , if you please , a niece of mine 
Shall there attend you .

My recompense is thanks , that's all ;
Yet my good will is great , though the gift small .

Imagine Pericles arriv'd at Tyre ,
Welcom'd and settled to his own desire .
His woeful queen we leave at Ephesus ,
Unto Diana there a votaress .
Now to Marina bend your mind ,
Whom our fast-growing scene must find 
At Tarsus , and by Cleon train'd 
In music , letters ; who hath gain'd 
Of education all the grace ,
Which makes her bath the heart and places 
Of general wonder . But , alack !
That monster envy , oft the wrack 
Of earned praise , Marina's life 
Seeks to take off by treason's knife .
And in this kind hath our Cleon 
One daughter , and a wench full grown ,
Even ripe for marriage-rite ; this maid 
Hight Philoten , and it is said 
For certain in our story , she 
Would ever with Marina be :
Be 't when she weav'd the sleided silk 
With fingers , long , small , white as milk ,
Or when she would with sharp neeld wound 
The cambric , which she made more sound 
By hurting it ; when to the lute 
She sung , and made the night-bird mute ,
That still records with moan ; or when 
She would with rich and constant pen 
Vail to her mistress Dian ; still 
This Philoten contends in skill 
With absolute Marina : so 
With the dove of Paphos might the crow 
Vie feathers white . Marina gets 
All praises , which are paid as debts ,
And not as given . This so darks 
In Philoten all graceful marks ,
That Cleon's wife , with envy rare ,
A present murderer does prepare 
For good Marina , that her daughter 
Might stand peerless by this slaughter .
The sooner her vile thoughts to stead ,
Lychorida , our nurse , is dead :
And cursed Dionyza hath 
The pregnant instrument of wrath 
Prest for this blow . The unborn event 
I do commend to your content :
Only I carry winged time 
Post on the lame feet of my rime ;
Which never could I so convey ,
Unless your thoughts went on my way .
Dionyza doth appear ,
With Leonine , a murderer .


Thy oath remember ; thou hast sworn to do 't :
'Tis but a blow , which never shall be known .
Thou canst not do a thing i' the world so soon ,
To yield thee so much profit . Let not conscience ,
Which is but cold , inflaming love i' thy bosom ,
Inflame too nicely ; nor let pity , which 
Even women have cast off , melt thee , but he 
A soldier to thy purpose .

I'll do 't ; but yet she is a goodly creature .

The fitter , then , the gods should have her . Here 
She comes weeping for her only mistress' death .
Thou art resolv'd ?

I am resolv'd .


No , I will rob Tellus of her weed ,
To strew thy green with flowers ; the yellows , blues ,
The purple violets , and marigolds ,
Shall as a carpet hang upon thy grave ,
While summer days do last . Ay me ! poor maid ,
Born in a tempest , when my mother died ,
This world to me is like a lasting storm ,
Whirring me from my friends .

How now , Marina ! why do you keep alone ?
How chance my daughter is not with you ? Do not 
Consume your blood with sorrowing ; you have 
A nurse of me . Lord ! how your favour's chang'd 
With this unprofitable woe . Come ,
Give me your flowers , ere the sea mar it .
Walk with Leonine ; the air is quick there ,
And it pierces and sharpens the stomach . Come ,
Leonine , take her by the arm , walk with her .

No , I pray you ;
I'll not bereave you of your servant .

Come , come ;
I love the king your father , and yourself ,
With more than foreign heart . We every day 
Expect him here ; when he shall come and find 
Our paragon to all reports thus blasted ,
He will repent the breadth of his great voyage ;
Blame both my lord and me , that we have taken 
No care to your best courses . Go , I pray you ;
Walk , and be cheerful once again ; reserve 
That excellent complexion , which did steal 
The eyes of young and old . Care not for me ;
I can go home alone .

Well , I will go ;
But yet I have no desire to it .

Come , come , I know 'tis good for you .
Walk half an hour , Leonine , at least .
Remember what I have said .

I warrant you , madam .

I'll leave you , my sweet lady , for a while ;
Pray you walk softly , do not heat your blood :
What ! I must have care of you .

My thanks , sweet madam .

Is this wind westerly that blows ?

South-west .

When I was born , the wind was north .

Was 't so ?

My father , as nurse said , did never fear ,
But cried 'Good seamen !' to the sailors , galling 
His kingly hands haling ropes ;
And , clasping to the mast , endur'd a sea 
That almost burst the deck .

When was this ?

When I was born :
Never were waves nor wind more violent ;
And from the ladder-tackle washes off 
A canvas-climber . 'Ha !' says one , 'wilt out ?' 
And with a dropping industry they skip 
From stem to stern ; the boatswain whistles , and 
The master calls , and trebles their confusion .

Come ; say your prayers .

What mean you ?

If you require a little space for prayer ,
I grant it . Pray ; but be not tedious ,
For the gods are quick of ear , and I am sworn 
To do my work with haste .

Why will you kill me ?

To satisfy my lady .

Why would she have me kill'd ?
Now , as I can remember , by my troth ,
I never did her hurt in all my life .
I never spake bad word , nor did ill turn 
To any living creature ; believe me , la ,
I never kill'd a mouse , nor hurt a fly ;
I trod upon a worm against my will ,
But I wept for it . How have I offended ,
Wherein my death might yield her any profit ,
Or my life imply her any danger ?

My commission 
Is not to reason of the deed , but do 't .

You will not do 't for all the world , I hope .
You are well favour'd , and your looks foreshow 
You have a gentle heart . I saw you lately ,
When you caught hurt in parting two that fought ;
Good sooth , it show'd well in you ; do so now ;
Your lady seeks my life ; come you between ,
And save poor me , the weaker .

I am sworn ,
And will dispatch .


Hold , villain !


A prize ! a prize !

Half-part , mates , half-part .
Come , let's have her aboard suddenly .

These roguing thieves serve the great pirate Valdes ;
And they have seiz'd Marina . Let her go ;
There's no hope she'll return . I'll swear she's dead ,
And thrown into the sea . But I'll see further ;
Perhaps they will but please themselves upon her ,
Not carry her aboard . If she remain ,
Whom they have ravish'd must by me be slain .


Boult .

Sir ?

Search the market narrowly ; Mitylene is full of gallants ; we lost too much money this mart by being too wenchless .

We were never so much out of creatures . We have but poor three , and they can do no more than they can do ; and they with continual action are even as good as rotten .

Therefore , let's have fresh ones , whate'er we pay for them . If there be not a conscience to be used in every trade , we shall never prosper .

Thou sayst true ; 'tis not the bringing up of poor bastards , as , I think , I have brought up some eleven 

Ay , to eleven ; and brought them down again . But shall I search the market ?

What else , man ? The stuff we have a strong wind will blow it to pieces , they are so pitifully sodden .

Thou sayst true ; they're too unwholesome , o' conscience . The poor Transylvanian is dead , that lay with the little baggage .

Ay , she quickly pooped him ; she made him roast-meat for worms . But I'll go search the market .


Three or four thousand chequins were as pretty a proportion to live quietly , and so give over .

Why to give over , I pray you ? is it a shame to get when we are old ?

O ! our credit comes not in like the commodity , nor the commodity wages not with the danger ; therefore , if in our youths we could pick up some pretty estate , 'twere not amiss to keep our door hatched . Besides , the sore terms we stand upon with the gods will be strong with us for giving over .

Come , other sorts offend as well as we .

As well as we ! ay , and better too ; we offend worse . Neither is our profession any trade ; it's no calling . But here comes Boult .


Come your ways . My masters , you say she's a virgin ?

O ! sir , we doubt it not .

Master , I have gone through for this piece , you see : if you like her , so ; if not , I have lost my earnest .

Boult , has she any qualities ?

She has a good face , speaks well , and has excellent good clothes ; there's no further necessity of qualities can make her be refused .

What's her price , Boult ?

I cannot be bated one doit of a thousand pieces .

Well , follow me , my masters , you shall have your money presently . Wife , take her in ; instruct her what she has to do , that she may not be raw in her entertainment .


Boult , take you the marks of her , the colour of her hair , complexion , height , age , with warrant of her virginity ; and cry , 'He that will give most , shall have her first .' Such a maiden-head were no cheap thing , if men were as they have been . Get this done as I command you .

Performance shall follow .


Alack ! that Leonine was so slack , so slow .
He should have struck , not spoke ; or that these pirates 
Not enough barbarous had not o'erboard thrown me 
For to seek my mother !

Why lament you , pretty one ?

That I am pretty .

Come , the gods have done their part in you .

I accuse them not .

You are lit into my hands , where you are like to live .

The more my fault 
To 'scape his hands where I was like to die .

Ay , and you shall live in pleasure .

No .

Yes , indeed , shall you , and taste gentlemen of all fashions . You shall fare well ; you shall have the difference of all complexions . What ! do you stop your ears ?

Are you a woman ?

What would you have me be , an I be not a woman ?

An honest woman , or not a woman .

Marry , whip thee , gosling ; I think I shall have something to do with you . Come , you are a young foolish sapling , and must be bowed as I would have you .

The gods defend me !

If it please the gods to defend you by men , then men must comfort you , men must feed you , men must stir you up . Boult's returned .

Now , sir , hast thou cried her through the market ?

I have cried her almost to the number of her hairs ; I have drawn her picture with my voice .

And I prithee , tell me , how dost thou find the inclination of the people , especially of the younger sort ?

Faith , they listened to me , as they would have hearkened to their father's testament . There was a Spaniard's mouth so watered , that he went to bed to her very description .

We shall have him here to-morrow with his best ruff on .

To-night , to-night . But , mistress , do you know the French knight that cowers i' the hams ?

Who ? Monsieur Veroles ?

Ay ; he offered to cut a caper at the proclamation ; but he made a groan at it , and swore he would see her to-morrow .

Well , well ; as for him , he brought his disease hither : here he does but repair it . I know he will come in our shadow , to scatter his crowns in the sun .

Well , if we had of every nation a traveller , we should lodge them with this sign .

Pray you , come hither awhile . You have fortunes coming upon you . Mark me : you must seem to do that fearfully , which you commit willingly ; to despise profit where you have most gain . To weep that you live as ye do makes pity in your lovers ; seldom but that pity begets you a good opinion , and that opinion a mere profit .

I understand you not .

O ! take her home , mistress , take her home ; these blushes of hers must be quenched with some present practice .

Thou sayst true , i' faith , so they must ; for your bride goes to that with shame which is her way to go with warrant .

Faith , some do , and some do not . But , mistress , if I have bargained for the joint ,

Thou mayst cut a morsel off the spit .

I may so ?

Who should deny it ? Come , young one , I like the manner of your garments well .

Ay , by my faith , they shall not be changed yet .

Boult , spend thou that in the town ; report what a sojourner we have ; you'll lose nothing by custom . When nature framed this piece , she meant thee a good turn ; therefore say what a paragon she is , and thou hast the harvest out of thine own report .

I warrant you , mistress , thunder shall not so awake the beds of eels as my giving out her beauty stir up the lewdly-inclined . I'll bring home some to-night .

Come your ways ; follow me .

If fires be hot , knives sharp , or waters deep ,
Untied I still my virgin knot will keep .
Diana , aid my purpose !

What have we to do with Diana ?
Pray you , will you go with us ?


Why , are you foolish ? Can it be undone ?

O Dionyza ! such a piece of slaughter 
The sun and moon ne'er look'd upon .

I think 
You'll turn a child again .

Were I chief lord of all this spacious world ,
I'd give it to undo the deed . O lady !
Much less in blood than virtue , yet a princess 
To equal any single crown o' the earth 
I' the justice of compare . O villain Leonine !
Whom thou hast poison'd too ;
If thou hadst drunk to him 't had been a kindness 
Becoming well thy fact ; what canst thou say 
When noble Pericles shall demand his child ?

That she is dead . Nurses are not the fates ,
To foster it , nor ever to preserve .
She died at night ; I'll say so . Who can cross it ?
Unless you play the pious innocent ,
And for an honest attribute cry out 
'She died by foul play .' 

O ! go to . Well , well ,
Of all the faults beneath the heavens , the gods 
Do like this worst .

Be one of those that think 
The pretty wrens of Tarsus will fly hence ,
And open this to Pericles . I do shame 
To think of what a noble strain you are ,
And of how coward a spirit .

To such proceeding 
Who ever but his approbation added ,
Though not his prime consent , he did not flow 
From honourable sources .

Be it so , then ;
Yet none does know but you how she came dead ,
Nor none can know , Leonine being gone .
She did distain my child , and stood between 
Her and her fortunes ; none would look on her ,
But cast their gazes on Marina's face ,
Whilst ours was blurted at and held a malkin 
Not worth the time of day . It pierc'd me thorough ;
And though you call my course unnatural ,
You not your child well loving , yet I find 
It greets me as an enterprise of kindness 
Perform'd to your sole daughter .

Heavens forgive it !

And as for Pericles ,
What should he say ? We wept after her hearse ,
And even yet we mourn ; her monument 
Is almost finish'd , and her epitaphs 
In glittering golden characters express 
A general praise to her , and care in us 
At whose expense 'tis done .

Thou art like the harpy ,
Which , to betray , dost with thine angel's face ,
Seize with thine eagle's talons .

You are like one that superstitiously 
Doth swear to the gods that winter kills the flies ;
But yet I know you'll do as I advise .

Thus time we waste , and longest leagues make short ;
Sail seas in cockles , have an wish but for 't ;
Making to take your imagination 
From bourn to bourn , region to region .
By you being pardon'd , we commit no crime 
To use one language in each several clime 
Where our scenes seem to live . I do beseech you 
To learn of me , who stand i' the gaps to teach you ,
The stages of our story . Pericles 
Is now again thwarting the wayward seas ,
Attended on by many a lord and knight ,
To see his daughter , all his life's delight .
Old Helicanus goes along . Behind 
Is left to govern it , you bear in mind ,
Old Escanes , whom Helicanus late 
Advanc'd in time to great and high estate .
Well-sailing ships and bounteous winds have brought 
This king to Tarsus , think his pilot thought ,
So with his steerage shall your thoughts grow on ,
To fetch his daughter home , who first is gone .
Like motes and shadows see them move awhile ;
Your ears unto your eyes I'll reconcile .


See how belief may suffer by foul show !
This borrow'd passion stands for true old woe ;
And Pericles , in sorrow all devour'd ,
With sighs shot through , and biggest tears o'ershower'd ,
Leaves Tarsus and again embarks . He swears 
Never to wash his face , nor cut his hairs ;
He puts on sackcloth , and to sea . He bears 
A tempest , which his mortal vessel tears ,
And yet he rides it out . Now please you wit 
The epitaph is for Marina writ 
By wicked Dionyza .


the fairest , sweet'st , and best lies here ,
who wither'd in her spring of year :
she was of tyrus the king's daughter ,
on whom foul death hath made this slaughter .
marina was she call'd ; and at her birth ,
thetis , being proud , swallow'd some part o' the earth :
therefore the earth , fearing to be o'erflow'd ,
hath thetis' birth-child on the heavens bestow'd :
wherefore she does , and swears she'll never stint ,
make raging battery upon shores of flint .

No visor does become black villany 
So well as soft and tender flattery .
Let Pericles believe his daughter's dead ,
And bear his courses to be ordered 
By Lady Fortune ; while our scene must play 
His daughter's woe and heavy well-a-day 
In her unholy service . Patience then ,
And think you now are all in Mitylen .


Did you ever hear the like ?

No , nor never shall do in such a place as this , she being once gone .

But to have divinity preached there ! did you ever dream of such a thing ?

No , no . Come , I am for no more bawdy-houses . Shall's go hear the vestals sing ?

I'll do any thing now that is virtuous ; but I am out of the road of rutting for ever .


Well , I had rather than twice the worth of her she had ne'er come here .

Fie , fie upon her ! she is able to freeze the god Priapus , and undo a whole generation ; we must either get her ravished , or be rid of her . When she should do for clients her fitment , and do me the kindness of our profession , she has me her quirks , her reasons , her master-reasons , her prayers , her knees ; that she would make a puritan of the devil if he should cheapen a kiss of her .

Faith , I must ravish her , or she'll disfurnish us of all our cavaliers , and make all our swearers priests .

Now , the pox upon her green-sickness for me !

Faith , there's no way to be rid on 't but by the way to the pox . Here comes the Lord Lysimachus , disguised .

We should have both lord and lown if the peevish baggage would but give way to customers .


How now ! How a dozen of virginities ?

Now , the gods to-bless your honour !

I am glad to see your honour in good health .

You may so ; 'tis the better for you that your resorters stand upon sound legs . How now ! wholesome iniquity , have you that a man may deal withal , and defy the surgeon ?

We have here one , sir , if she would but there never came her like in Mitylene .

If she'd do the deed of darkness , thou wouldst say .

Your honour knows what 'tis to say well enough .

Well ; call forth , call forth .

For flesh and blood , sir , white and red , you shall see a rose ; and she were a rose indeed if she had but 

What , prithee ?

O ! sir , I can be modest .

That dignifies the renown of a bawd no less than it gives a good report to a number to be chaste .


Here comes that which grows to the stalk ; never plucked yet , I can assure you .

Is she not a fair creature ?

Faith , she would serve after a long voyage at sea . Well , there's for you ; leave us .

I beseech your honour , give me leave ; a word , and I'll have done presently .

I beseech you do .

First , I would have you note , this is an honourable man .

I desire to find him so , that I may worthily note him .

Next , he's the governor of this country , and a man whom I am bound to .

If he govern the country , you are bound to him indeed ; but how honourable he is in that I know not .

Pray you , without any more virginal fencing , will you use him kindly ? He will line your apron with gold .

What he will do graciously , I will thankfully receive .

Ha' you done ?

My lord , she's not paced yet ; you must take some pains to work her to your manage . Come , we will leave his honour and her together .

Go thy ways .

Now , pretty one , how long have you been at this trade ?

What trade , sir ?

Why , I cannot name 't but I shall offend .

I cannot be offended with my trade . Please you to name it .

How long have you been of this profession ?

E'er since I can remember .

Did you go to 't so young ? Were you a gamester at five or at seven ?

Earlier too , sir , if now I be one .

Why , the house you dwell in proclaims you to be a creature of sale .

Do you know this house to be a place of such resort , and will come into 't ? I hear say you are of honourable parts , and are the governor of this place .

Why , hath your principal made known unto you who I am ?

Who is my principal ?

Why , your herb-woman ; she that sets seeds and roots of shame and iniquity . O ! you have heard something of my power , and so stand aloof for more serious wooing . But I protest to thee , pretty one , my authority shall not see thee , or else look friendly upon thee . Come , bring me to some private place ; come , come .

If you were born to honour , show it now ;
If put upon you , make the judgment good 
That thought you worthy of it .

How's this ? how's this ? Some more ; be sage .

For me ,
That am a maid , though most ungentle fortune 
Hath plac'd me in this sty , where , since I came ,
Diseases have been sold dearer than physic ,
O ! that the gods 
Would set me free from this unhallow'd place ,
Though they did change me to the meanest bird 
That flies i' the purer air !

I did not think 
Thou couldst have spoke so well ; ne'er dream'd thou couldst .
Had I brought hither a corrupted mind ,
Thy speech had alter'd it . Hold , here's gold for thee ;
Persever in that clear way thou goest ,
And the gods strengthen thee !

The good gods preserve you !

For me , be you thoughten 
That I came with no ill intent , for to me 
The very doors and windows savour vilely .
Farewell . Thou art a piece of virtue , and 
I doubt not but thy training hath been noble .
Hold , here's more gold for thee .
A curse upon him , die he like a thief ,
That robs thee of thy goodness ! If thou dost 
Hear from me , it shall be for thy good .


I beseech your honour , one piece for me .

Avaunt ! thou damned door-keeper . Your house ,
But for this virgin that doth prop it , would 
Sink and overwhelm you . Away !


How's this ? We must take another course with you . If your peevish chastity , which is not worth a breakfast in the cheapest country under the cope , shall undo a whole household , let me be gelded like a spaniel . Come your ways .

Whither would you have me ?

I must have your maidenhead taken off , or the common hangman shall execute it . Come your ways . We'll have no more gentlemen driven away . Come your ways , I say .


How now ! what's the matter ?

Worse and worse , mistress ; she has here spoken holy words to the Lord Lysimachus .

O ! abominable .

She makes our profession as it were to stink afore the face of the gods .

Marry , hang her up for ever !

The nobleman would have dealt with her like a nobleman , and she sent him away as cold as a snowball ; saying his prayers too .

Boult , take her away ; use her at thy pleasure ; crack the glass of her virginity , and make the rest malleable .

An if she were a thornier piece of ground than she is , she shall be ploughed .

Hark , hark , you gods !

She conjures ; away with her ! Would she had never come within my doors ! Marry , hang you ! She's born to undo us . Will you not go the way of women-kind ? Marry , come up , my dish of chastity with rosemary and bays !


Come , mistress ; come your ways with me .

Whither wilt thou have me ?

To take from you the jewel you hold so dear .

Prithee , tell me one thing first .

Come now , your one thing .

What canst thou wish thine enemy to be ?

Why , I could wish him to be my master , or rather , my mistress .

Neither of these are so bad as thou art ,
Since they do better thee in their command .
Thou hold'st a place , for which the pained'st fiend 
Of hell would not in reputation change ;
Thou art the damned door-keeper to every 
Coystril that comes inquiring for his Tib ,
To the choleric fisting of every rogue 
Thy ear is liable , thy food is such 
As hath been belch'd on by infected lungs .

What would you have me do ? go to the wars , would you ? where a man may serve seven years for the loss of a leg , and have not money enough in the end to buy him a wooden one ?

Do any thing but this thou doest . Empty .
Old receptacles , or common sewers , of filth ;
Serve by indenture to the common hangman :
Any of these ways are yet better than this ;
For what thou professest , a baboon , could he speak ,
Would own a name too dear . O ! that the gods 
Would safely deliver me from this place .
Here , here's gold for thee .
If that thy master would gain by me ,
Proclaim that I can sing , weave , sew , and dance ,
With other virtues , which I'll keep from boast ;
And I will undertake all these to teach .
I doubt not but this populous city will 
Yield many scholars .

But can you teach all this you speak of ?

Prove that I cannot , take me home again ,
And prostitute me to the basest groom 
That doth frequent your house .

Well , I will see what I can do for thee ; if I can place thee , I will .

But , amongst honest women .

Faith , my acquaintance lies little amongst them . But since my master and mistress have bought you , there's no going but by their consent ; therefore I will make them acquainted with your purpose , and I doubt not but I shall find them tractable enough . Come ; I'll do for thee what I can ; come your ways .


Marina thus the brothel 'scapes , and chances 
Into an honest house , our story says .
She sings like one immortal , and she dances 
As goddess-like to her admired lays ;
Deep clerks she dumbs ; and with her neeld composes 
Nature's own shape , of bud , bird , branch , or berry ,
That even her art sisters the natural roses ;
Her inkle , silk , twin with the rubied cherry ;
That pupils lacks she none of noble race ,
Who pour their bounty on her ; and her gain 
She gives the cursed bawd . Here we her place ;
And to her father turn our thoughts again ,
Where we left him , on the sea . We there him lost ,
Whence , driven before the winds , he is arriv'd 
Here where his daughter dwells : and on this coast 
Suppose him now at anchor . The city striv'd 
God Neptune's annual feast to keep ; from whence 
Lysimachus our Tyrian ship espies ,
His banners sable , trimm'd with rich expense ;
And to him in his barge with fervour hies .
In your supposing once more put your sight 
Of heavy Pericles ; think this his bark :
Where what is done in action , more , if might ,
Shall be discover'd ; please you , sit and hark .

Where's the Lord Helicanus ? he can resolve you .
O ! here he is .
Sir , there's a barge put off from Mitylene ,
And in it is Lysimachus , the governor ,
Who craves to come aboard . What is your will ?

That he have his . Call up some gentlemen .

Ho , gentlemen ! my lord calls .


Doth your lordship call ?

Gentlemen , there's some of worth would come aboard ;
I pray ye , greet them fairly .

Sir ,
This is the man that can , in aught you would ,
Resolve you .

Hail , reverend sir ! The gods preserve you !

And you , sir , to outlive the age I am ,
And die as I would do .

You wish me well .
Being on shore , honouring of Neptune's triumphs ,
Seeing this goodly vessel ride before us ,
I made to it to know of whence you are .

First , what is your place ?

I am the governor of this place you lie before .

Sir ,
Our vessel is of Tyre , in it the king ;
A man who for this three months hath not spoken 
To any one , nor taken sustenance 
But to prorogue his grief .

Upon what ground is his distemperature ?

'Twould be too tedious to repeat ;
But the main grief springs from the loss 
Of a beloved daughter and a wife .

May we not see him ?

You may ;
But bootless is your sight : he will not speak 
To any .

Yet let me obtain my wish .

Behold him .

This was a goodly person ,
Till the disaster that , one mortal night ,
Drove him to this .

Sir king , all hail ! the gods preserve you !
Hall , royal sir !

It is in vain ; he will not speak to you .

Sir ,
We have a maid in Mitylene , I durst wager ,
Would win some words of him .

'Tis well bethought .
She questionless with her sweet harmony 
And other chosen attractions , would allure ,
And make a battery through his deafen'd ports 
Which now are midway stopp'd :
She is all happy as the fair'st of all ,
And with her fellow maids is now upon 
The leafy shelter that abuts against 
The island's side .


Sure , all's effectless ; yet nothing we'll omit ,
That bears recovery's name . But , since your kindness 
We have stretch'd thus far , let us beseech you ,
That for our gold we may provision have ,
Wherein we are not destitute for want ,
But weary for the staleness .

O ! sir , a courtesy ,
Which if we should deny , the most just gods 
For every graff would send a caterpillar ,
And so afflict our province . Yet once more 
Let me entreat to know at large the cause 
Of your king's sorrow .

Sit , sir , I will recount it to you ;
But see , I am prevented .


O ! here is 
The lady that I sent for . Welcome , fair one !
Is't not a goodly presence ?

She's a gallant lady .

She's such a one , that were I well assur'd 
Came of a gentle kind and noble stock ,
I'd wish no better choice , and think me rarely wed .
Fair one , all goodness that consists in bounty 
Expect even here , where is a kingly patient :
If that thy prosperous and artificial feat 
Can draw him but to answer thee in aught ,
Thy sacred physic shall receive such pay 
As thy desires can wish .

Sir , I will use 
My utmost skill in his recovery ,
Provided 
That none but I and my companion maid 
Be suffer'd to come near him .

Come , let us leave her ;
And the gods make her prosperous !


Mark'd he your music ?

No , nor look'd on us .

See , she will speak to him .

Hail , sir ! my lord , lend ear .

Hum ! ha !

I am a maid ,
My lord , that ne'er before invited eyes ,
But have been gaz'd on like a comet ; she speaks ,
My lord , that , may be , hath endur'd a grief 
Might equal yours , if both were justly weigh'd .
Though wayward Fortune did malign my state ,
My derivation was from ancestors 
Who stood equivalent with mighty kings ;
But time hath rooted out my parentage ,
And to the world and awkward casualties 
Bound me in servitude .

I will desist ;
But there is something glows upon my cheek ,
And whispers in mine ear , 'Go not till he speak .' 

My fortunes parentage good parentage 
To equal mine !was it not thus ? what say you ?

I said , my lord , if you did know my parentage ,
You would not do me violence .

I do think so . Pray you , turn your eyes upon me .
You are like something that What country-woman ?
Here of these shores ?

No , nor of any shores ;
Yet I was mortally brought forth , and am 
No other than I appear .

I am great with woe , and shall deliver weeping .
My dearest wife was like this maid , and such a one 
My daughter might have been : my queen's square brows ;
Her stature to an inch ; as wand-like straight ;
As silver-voic'd ; her eyes as jewel-like ,
And cas'd as richly ; in pace another Juno ;
Who starves the ears she feeds , and makes them hungry ,
The more she gives them speech . Where do you live ?

Where I am but a stranger ; from the deck 
You may discern the place .

Where were you bred ?
And how achiev'd you these endowments , which 
You make more rich to owe ?

Should I tell my history , it would seem 
Like lies , disdain'd in the reporting .

Prithee , speak ;
Falseness cannot come from thee , for thou look'st 
Modest as justice , and thou seem'st a palace 
For the crown'd truth to dwell in . I believe thee ,
And make my senses credit thy relation 
To points that seem impossible ; for thou lookest 
Like one I lov'd indeed . What were thy friends ?
Didst thou not say when I did push thee back ,
Which was when I perceiv'd thee ,that thou cam'st 
From good descending ?

So indeed I did .

Report thy parentage . I think thou saidst 
Thou hadst been toss'd from wrong to injury ,
And that thou thought'st thy griefs might equal mine ,
If both were open'd .

Some such thing 
I said , and said no more but what my thoughts 
Did warrant me was likely .

Tell thy story ;
If thine consider'd prove the thousandth part 
Of my endurance , thou art a man , and I 
Have suffer'd like a girl ; yet thou dost look 
Like Patience gazing on kings' graves , and smiling 
Extremity out of act . What were thy friends ?
How lost thou them ? Thy name , my most kind virgin ?
Recount , I do beseech thee . Come , sit by me .

My name is Marina .

O ! I am mock'd ,
And thou by some incensed god sent hither 
To make the world to laugh at me .

Patience , good sir ,
Or here I'll cease .

Nay , I'll be patient .
Thou little know'st how thou dost startle me ,
To call thyself Marina .

The name 
Was given me by one that had some power ;
My father , and a king .

How ! a king's daughter ?
And call'd Marina ?

You said you would believe me ;
But , not to be a troubler of your peace ,
I will end here .

But are you flesh and blood ?
Have you a working pulse ? and are no fairy ?
Motion !Well ; speak on . Where were you born ?
And wherefore call'd Marina ?

Call'd Marina 
For I was born at sea .

At sea ! what mother ?

My mother was the daughter of a king ;
Who died the minute I was born ,
As my good nurse Lychorida hath oft 
Deliver'd weeping .

O ! stop there a little .
This is the rarest dream that e'er dull sleep 
Did mock sad fools withal ; this cannot be .
My daughter's buried . Well ; where were you bred ?
I'll hear you more , to the bottom of your story ,
And never interrupt you .

You'll scorn to believe me ; 'twere best I did give o'er .

I will believe you by the syllable 
Of what you shall deliver . Yet , give me leave :
How came you in these parts ? where were you bred ?

The king my father did in Tarsus leave me ,
Till cruel Cleon , with his wicked wife ,
Did seek to murder me ; and having woo'd 
A villain to attempt it , who having drawn to do 't ,
A crew of pirates came and rescu'd me ;
Brought me to Mitylene . But , good sir ,
Whither will you have me ? Why do you weep ? It may be 
You think me an impostor ; no , good faith ;
I am the daughter to King Pericles ,
If good King Pericles be .

Ho , Helicanus !

Calls my lord ?

Thou art a grave and noble counsellor ,
Most wise in general ; tell me , if thou canst ,
What this maid is , or what is like to be ,
That thus hath made me weep ?

I know not ; but 
Here is the regent , sir , of Mitylene ,
Speaks nobly of her .

She never would tell 
Her parentage ; being demanded that ,
She would sit still and weep .

O Helicanus ! strike me , honour'd sir ;
Give me a gash , put me to present pain ,
Lest this great sea of joys rushing upon me 
O'erbear the shores of my mortality ,
And drown me with their sweetness . O ! come hither ,
Thou that begett'st him that did thee beget ;
Thou that wast born at sea , buried at Tarsus ,
And found at sea again . O Helicanus !
Down on thy knees , thank the holy gods as loud 
As thunder threatens us ; this is Marina .
What was thy mother's name ? tell me but that ,
For truth can never be confirm'd enough ,
Though doubts did ever sleep .

First , sir , I pray ,
What is your title ?

I am Pericles of Tyre : but tell me now 
My drown'd queen's name , as in the rest you said 
Thou hast been god-like perfect ;
Thou'rt heir of kingdoms , and another life 
To Pericles thy father .

Is it no more to be your daughter than 
To say my mother's name was Thaisa ?
Thaisa was my mother , who did end 
The minute I began .

Now , blessing on thee ! rise ; thou art my child ,
Give me fresh garments . Mine own , Helicanus ;
She is not dead at Tarsus , as she should have been ,
By savage Cleon ; she shall tell thee all ;
When thou shalt kneel , and justify in knowledge 
She is thy very princess . Who is this ?

Sir , 'tis the governor of Mitylene ,
Who , hearing of your melancholy state ,
Did come to see you .

I embrace you .
Give me my robes . I am wild in my beholding .
O heavens ! bless my girl . But , hark ! what music ?
Tell Helicanus , my Marina , tell him 
O'er , point by point , for yet he seems to doubt ,
How sure you are my daughter . But , what music ?

My lord , I hear none .

None !
The music of the spheres ! List , my Marina .

It is not good to cross him ; give him way .

Rarest sounds ! Do ye not hear ?

My lord , I hear .


Most heavenly music :
It nips me unto list'ning , and thick slumber 
Hangs upon mine eyes ; let me rest .


A pillow for his head .
So , leave him all . Well , my companion friends ,
If this but answer to my just belief ,
I'll well remember you .

My temple stands in Ephesus ; hie thee thither ,
And do upon mine altar sacrifice .
There , when my maiden priests are met together ,
Before the people all ,
Reveal how thou at sea didst lose thy wife ;
To mourn thy crosses , with thy daughter's , call 
And give them repetition to the life .
Perform my bidding , or thou liv'st in woe ;
Do it , and happy ; by my silver bow !
Awake , and tell thy dream !


Celestial Dian , goddess argentine ,
I will obey thee ! Helicanus !


Sir ?

My purpose was for Tarsus , there to strike 
The inhospitable Cleon : but I am 
For other service first : toward Ephesus 
Turn our blown sails ; eftsoons I'll tell thee why .


Shall we refresh us , sir , upon your shore ,
And give you gold for such provision 
As our intents will need ?

Sir ,
With all my heart ; and when you come ashore ,
I have another suit .

You shall prevail ,
Were it to woo my daughter ; for it seems 
You have been noble towards her .

Sir , lend me your arm .

Come , my Marina .


Now our sands are almost run ;
More a little , and then dumb .
This , my last boon , give me ,
For such kindness must relieve me ,
That you aptly will suppose 
What pageantry , what feats , what shows ,
What minstrelsy , and pretty din ,
The regent made in Mitylen 
To greet the king . So he thriv'd ,
That he is promis'd to be wiv'd 
To fair Marina ; but in no wise 
Till he had done his sacrifice ,
As Dian bade : whereto being bound ,
The interim , pray you , all confound .
In feather'd briefness sails are fill'd ,
And wishes fall out as they're will'd .
At Ephesus , the temple see ,
Our king and all his company .
That he can hither come so soon ,
Is by your fancy's thankful doom .

Hail , Dian ! to perform thy just command ,
I here confess myself the King of Tyre ;
Who , frighted from my country , did wed 
At Pentapolis the fair Thaisa .
At sea in childbed died she , but brought forth 
A maid-child call'd Marina ; who , O goddess !
Wears yet thy silver livery . She at Tarsus 
Was nurs'd with Cleon , whom at fourteen years 
He sought to murder ; but her better stars 
Brought her to Mitylene , 'gainst whose shore 
Riding , her fortunes brought the maid aboard us ,
Where , by her own most clear remembrance , she 
Made known herself my daughter .

Voice and favour !
You are , you are O royal Pericles !


What means the nun ? she dies ! help , gentlemen !

Noble sir ,
If you have told Diana's altar true ,
This is your wife .

Reverend appearer , no ;
I threw her o'erboard with these very arms .

Upon this coast , I warrant you .

'Tis most certain .

Look to the lady . O ! she's but o'erjoy'd .
Early in blustering morn this lady was 
Thrown upon this shore . I op'd the coffin ,
Found there rich jewels ; recover'd her , and plac'd her 
Here in Diana's temple .

May we see them ?

Great sir , they shall be brought you to my house ,
Whither I invite you . Look ! Thaisa is 
Recovered .

O ! let me look !
If he be none of mine , my sanctity 
Will to my sense bend no licentious ear ,
But curb it , spite of seeing . O ! my lord ,
Are you not Pericles ? Like him you speak ,
Like him you are . Did you not name a tempest ,
A birth , and death ?

The voice of dead Thaisa !

That Thaisa am I , supposed dead 
And drown'd .

Immortal Dian !

Now I know you better .
When we with tears parted Pentapolis ,
The king my father gave you such a ring .


This , this : no more , you gods ! your present kindness 
Makes my past miseries sport : you shall do well ,
That on the touching of her lips I may 
Melt and no more be seen . O ! come , be buried 
A second time within these arms .

My heart 
Leaps to be gone into my mother's bosom .


Look , who kneels here ! Flesh of thy flesh , Thaisa ;
Thy burden at the sea , and call'd Marina ,
For she was yielded there .

Bless'd , and mine own !

Hail , madam , and my queen !

I know you not .

You have heard me say , when I did fly from Tyre ,
I left behind an ancient substitute ;
Can you remember what I call'd the man ?
I have nam'd him oft .

'Twas Helicanus then .

Still confirmation !
Embrace him , dear Thaisa ; this is he .
Now do I long to hear how you were found ,
How possibly preserv'd , and whom to thank ,
Besides the gods , for this great miracle .

Lord Cerimon , my lord ; this man ,
Through whom the gods have shown their power ; that can 
From first to last resolve you .

Reverend sir ,
The gods can have no mortal officer 
More like a god than you . Will you deliver 
How this dead queen re-lives ?

I will , my lord .
Beseech you , first go with me to my house .
Where shall be shown you all was found with her ;
How she came placed here in the temple ;
No needful thing omitted .

Pure Dian ! bless thee for thy vision ; I 
Will offer night-oblations to thee . Thaisa ,
This prince , the fair-betrothed of your daughter ,
Shall marry her at Pentapolis . And now 
This ornament 
Makes me look dismal will I clip to form ;
And what this fourteen years no rasor touch'd ,
To grace thy marriage-day I'll beautify .

Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit , sir ,
My father's dead .

Heavens make a star of him ! Yet there , my queen ,
We'll celebrate their nuptials , and ourselves 
Will in that kingdom spend our following days ;
Our son and daughter shall in Tyrus reign .
Lord Cerimon , we do our longing stay 
To hear the rest untold . Sir , lead's the way .

In Antiochus and his daughter you have heard 
Of monstrous lust the due and just reward :
In Pericles , his queen , and daughter , seen 
Although assail'd with fortune fierce and keen 
Virtue preserv'd from fell destruction's blast ,
Led on by heaven , and crown'd with joy at last .
In Helicanus may you well descry 
A figure of truth , of faith , of loyalty .
In reverend Cerimon there well appears 
The worth that learned charity aye wears .
For wicked Cleon and his wife , when fame 
Had spread their cursed deed , and honour'd name 
Of Pericles , to rage the city turn ,
That him and his they in his palace burn :
The gods for murder seemed so content 
To punish them ; although not done , but meant .
So on your patience evermore attending ,
New joy wait on you ! Here our play hath ending .

THE COMEDY OF ERRORS

Proceed , Solinus , to procure my fall ,
And by the doom of death end woes and all .

Merchant of Syracusa , plead no more .
I am not partial to infringe our laws :
The enmity and discord which of late 
Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke 
To merchants , our well-dealing countrymen ,
Who , wanting guilders to redeem their lives ,
Have seal'd his rigorous statutes with their bloods ,
Excludes all pity from our threat'ning looks .
For , since the mortal and intestine jars 
'Twixt thy seditious countrymen and us ,
It hath in solemn synods been decreed ,
Both by the Syracusians and ourselves ,
T' admit no traffic to our adverse towns :
Nay , more , if any , born at Ephesus 
Be seen at Syracusian marts and fairs ;
Again , if any Syracusian born 
Come to the bay of Ephesus , he dies ,
His goods confiscate to the duke's dispose ;
Unless a thousand marks be levied ,
To quit the penalty and to ransom him .
Thy substance , valu'd at the highest rate ,
Cannot amount unto a hundred marks ;
Therefore , by law thou art condemn'd to die .

Yet this my comfort : when your words are done ,
My woes end likewise with the evening sun .

Well , Syracusian ; say , in brief the cause 
Why thou departedst from thy native home ,
And for what cause thou cam'st to Ephesus .

A heavier task could not have been impos'd 
Than I to speak my griefs unspeakable ;
Yet , that the world may witness that my end 
Was wrought by nature , not by vile offence ,
I'll utter what my sorrow gives me leave .
In Syracusa was I born , and wed 
Unto a woman , happy but for me ,
And by me too , had not our hap been bad .
With her I liv'd in joy : our wealth increas'd 
By prosperous voyages I often made 
To Epidamnum ; till my factor's death ,
And the great care of goods at random left ,
Drew me from kind embracements of my spouse :
From whom my absence was not six months old ,
Before herself ,almost at fainting under 
The pleasing punishment that women bear ,
Had made provision for her following me ,
And soon and safe arrived where I was .
There had she not been long but she became 
A joyful mother of two goodly sons ;
And , which was strange , the one so like the other ,
As could not be distinguish'd but by names .
That very hour , and in the self-same inn ,
A meaner woman was delivered 
Of such a burden , male twins , both alike .
Those ,for their parents were exceeding poor ,
I bought , and brought up to attend my sons .
My wife , not meanly proud of two such boys ,
Made daily motions for our home return :
Unwilling I agreed ; alas ! too soon 
We came aboard .
A league from Epidamnum had we sail'd ,
Before the always-wind-obeying deep 
Gave any tragic instance of our harm :
But longer did we not retain much hope ;
For what obscured light the heavens did grant 
Did but convey unto our fearful minds 
A doubtful warrant of immediate death ;
Which , though myself would gladly have embrac'd ,
Yet the incessant weepings of my wife ,
Weeping before for what she saw must come ,
And piteous plainings of the pretty babes ,
That mourn'd for fashion , ignorant what to fear ,
Forc'd me to seek delays for them and me .
And this it was , for other means was none :
The sailors sought for safety by our boat ,
And left the ship , then sinking-ripe , to us :
My wife , more careful for the latter-born ,
Had fasten'd him unto a small spare mast ,
Such as seafaring men provide for storms ;
To him one of the other twins was bound ,
Whilst I had been like heedful of the other .
The children thus dispos'd , my wife and I ,
Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fix'd ,
Fasten'd ourselves at either end the mast ;
And floating straight , obedient to the stream ,
Were carried towards Corinth , as we thought .
At length the sun , gazing upon the earth ,
Dispers'd those vapours that offended us ,
And , by the benefit of his wished light 
The seas wax'd calm , and we discovered 
Two ships from far making amain to us ;
Of Corinth that , of Epidaurus this :
But ere they came ,O ! let me say no more ;
Gather the sequel by that went before .

Nay , forward , old man ; do not break off so ;
For we may pity , though not pardon thee .

O ! had the gods done so , I had not now 
Worthily term'd them merciless to us !
For , ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues ,
We were encounter'd by a mighty rock ;
Which being violently borne upon ,
Our helpful ship was splitted in the midst ;
So that , in this unjust divorce of us 
Fortune had left to both of us alike 
What to delight in , what to sorrow for .
Her part , poor soul ! seeming as burdened 
With lesser weight , but not with lesser woe ,
Was carried with more speed before the wind ,
And in our sight they three were taken up 
By fishermen of Corinth , as we thought .
At length , another ship had seiz'd on us ;
And , knowing whom it was their hap to save ,
Gave healthful welcome to their ship-wrack'd guests ;
And would have reft the fishers of their prey ,
Had not their bark been very slow of sail ;
And therefore homeward did they bend their course .
Thus have you heard me sever'd from my bliss ,
That by misfortune was my life prolong'd ,
To tell sad stories of my own mishaps .

And , for the sake of them thou sorrowest for ,
Do me the favour to dilate at full 
What hath befall'n of them and thee till now .

My youngest boy , and yet my eldest care ,
At eighteen years became inquisitive 
After his brother ; and importun'd me 
That his attendant for his case was like ,
Reft of his brother , but retain'd his name 
Might bear him company in the quest of him ;
Whom whilst I labour'd of a love to see ,
I hazarded the loss of whom I lov'd .
Five summers have I spent in furthest Greece ,
Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia ,
And , coasting homeward , came to Ephesus ,
Hopeless to find , yet loath to leave unsought 
Or that or any place that harbours men .
But here must end the story of my life ;
And happy were I in my timely death ,
Could all my travels warrant me they live .

Hapless  geon , whom the fates have mark'd 
To bear the extremity of dire mishap !
Now , trust me , were it not against our laws ,
Against my crown , my oath , my dignity ,
Which princes , would they , may not disannul ,
My soul should sue as advocate for thee .
But though thou art adjudged to the death 
And passed sentence may not be recall'd 
But to our honour's great disparagement ,
Yet will I favour thee in what I can :
Therefore , merchant , I'll limit thee this day 
To seek thy life by beneficial help .
Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus ;
Beg thou , or borrow , to make up the sum ,
And live ; if no , then thou art doom'd to die .
Gaoler , take him to thy custody .

I will , my lord .

Hopeless and helpless doth  geon wend ,
But to procrastinate his lifeless end .


Therefore , give out you are of Epidamnum ,
Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate .
This very day , a Syracusian merchant 
Is apprehended for arrival here ;
And , not being able to buy out his life ,
According to the statute of the town 
Dies ere the weary sun set in the west .
There is your money that I had to keep .

Go bear it to the Centaur , where we host ,
And stay there , Dromio , till I come to thee .
Within this hour it will be dinner-time :
Till that , I'll view the manners of the town ,
Peruse the traders , gaze upon the buildings ,
And then return and sleep within mine inn ,
For with long travel I am stiff and weary .
Get thee away .

Many a man would take you at your word ,
And go indeed , having so good a mean .


A trusty villain , sir , that very oft ,
When I am dull with care and melancholy ,
Lightens my humour with his merry jests .
What , will you walk with me about the town ,
And then go to my inn and dine with me ?

I am invited , sir , to certain merchants ,
Of whom I hope to make much benefit ;
I crave your pardon . Soon at five o'clock ,
Please you , I'll meet with you upon the mart ,
And afterward consort you till bed-time :
My present business calls me from you now .

Farewell till then : I will go lose myself ,
And wander up and down to view the city .

Sir , I commend you to your own content .


He that commends me to mine own content ,
Commends me to the thing I cannot get .
I to the world am like a drop of water 
That in the ocean seeks another drop ;
Who , falling there to find his fellow forth ,
Unseen , inquisitive , confounds himself :
So I , to find a mother and a brother ,
In quest of them , unhappy , lose myself .


Here comes the almanack of my true date .

What now ? How chance thou art return'd so soon ?

Return'd so soon ! rather approach'd too late :
The capon burns , the pig falls from the spit ,
The clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell ;
My mistress made it one upon my cheek :
She is so hot because the meat is cold ;
The meat is cold because you come not home ;
You come not home because you have no stomach ;
You have no stomach , having broke your fast ;
But we , that know what 'tis to fast and pray ,
Are penitent for your default to-day .

Stop in your wind , sir : tell me this , I pray :
Where have you left the money that I gave you ?

O !sixpence , that I had o' Wednesday last 
To pay the saddler for my mistress' crupper ;
The saddler had it , sir ; I kept it not .

I am not in a sportive humour now .
Tell me , and dally not , where is the money ?
We being strangers here , how dar'st thou trust 
So great a charge from thine own custody ?

I pray you , jest , sir , as you sit at dinner .
I from my mistress come to you in post ;
If I return , I shall be post indeed ,
For she will score your fault upon my pate .
Methinks your maw , like mine , should be your clock 
And strike you home without a messenger .

Come , Dromio , come ; these jests are out of season ;
Reserve them till a merrier hour than this .
Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee ?

To me , sir ? why , you gave no gold to me .

Come on , sir knave , have done your foolishness ,
And tell me how thou hast dispos'd thy charge .

My charge was but to fetch you from the mart 
Home to your house , the Ph nix , sir , to dinner :
My mistress and her sister stays for you .

Now , as I am a Christian , answer me ,
In what safe place you have bestow'd my money ;
Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours 
That stands on tricks when I am undispos'd .
Where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me ?

I have some marks of yours upon my pate ,
Some of my mistress' marks upon my shoulders ,
But not a thousand marks between you both .
If I should pay your worship those again ,
Perchance you will not bear them patiently .

Thy mistress' marks ! what mistress , slave , hast thou ?

Your worship's wife , my mistress at the Ph nix ;
She that doth fast till you come home to dinner ,
And prays that you will hie you home to dinner .

What ! wilt thou flout me thus unto my face ,
Being forbid ? There , take you that , sir knave .


What mean you , sir ? for God's sake , hold your hands !
Nay , an you will not , sir , I'll take my heels .


Upon my life , by some device or other 
The villain is o'er-raught of all my money .
They say this town is full of cozenage ;
As , nimble jugglers that deceive the eye ,
Dark-working sorcerers that change the mind ,
Soul-killing witches that deform the body ,
Disguised cheaters , prating mountebanks ,
And many such-like liberties of sin :
If it prove so , I will be gone the sooner .
I'll to the Centaur , to go seek this slave :
I greatly fear my money is not safe .

Neither my husband , nor the slave return'd ,
That in such haste I sent to seek his master !
Sure , Luciana , it is two o'clock .

Perhaps some merchant hath invited him ,
And from the mart he's somewhere gone to dinner .
Good sister , let us dine and never fret :
A man is master of his liberty :
Time is their master , and , when they see time ,
They'll go or come : if so , be patient , sister .

Why should their liberty than ours be more ?

Because their business still lies out o' door .

Look , when I serve him so , he takes it ill .

O ! know he is the bridle of your will .

There's none but asses will be bridled so .

Why , headstrong liberty is lash'd with woe .
There's nothing situate under heaven's eye 
But hath his bound , in earth , in sea , in sky :
The beasts , the fishes , and the winged fowls ,
Are their males' subjects and at their controls .
Men , more divine , the masters of all these ,
Lords of the wide world , and wild wat'ry seas ,
Indu'd with intellectual sense and souls ,
Of more pre-eminence than fish and fowls ,
Are masters to their females and their lords :
Then , let your will attend on their accords .

This servitude makes you to keep unwed .

Not this , but troubles of the marriage-bed .

But , were you wedded , you would bear some sway .

Ere I learn love , I'll practise to obey .

How if your husband start some other where ?

Till he come home again , I would forbear .

Patience unmov'd ! no marvel though she pause ;
They can be meek that have no other cause .
A wretched soul , bruis'd with adversity ,
We bid be quiet when we hear it cry ;
But were we burden'd with like weight of pain ,
As much , or more we should ourselves complain :
So thou , that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee ,
With urging helpless patience wouldst relieve me :
But if thou live to see like right bereft .
This fool-begg'd patience in thee will be left .

Well , I will marry one day , but to try .
Here comes your man : now is your husband nigh .


Say , is your tardy master now at hand ?

Nay , he's at two hands with me , and that my two ears can witness .

Say , didst thou speak with him ? Know'st thou his mind ?

Ay , ay , he told his mind upon mine ear .
Beshrew his hand , I scarce could understand it .

Spake he so doubtfully , thou couldst not feel his meaning ?

Nay , he struck so plainly , I could too well feel his blows ; and withal so doubtfully , that I could scarce understand them .

But say , I prithee , is he coming home ?
It seems he hath great care to please his wife .

Why , mistress , sure my master is horn-mad .

Horn-mad , thou villain !

I mean not cuckold-mad ; but , sure , he is stark mad .
When I desir'd him to come home to dinner ,
He ask'd me for a thousand marks in gold :
''Tis dinner time ,' quoth I ; 'my gold !' quoth he :
'Your meat doth burn ,' quoth I ; 'my gold !' quoth he :
'Will you come home ?' quoth I : 'my gold !' quoth he :
'Where is the thousand marks I gave thee , villain ?' 
'The pig ,' quoth I , 'is burn'd ;' 'my gold !' quoth he :
'My mistress , sir ,' quoth I : 'hang up thy mistress !
I know not thy mistress : out on thy mistress !' 

Quoth who ?

Quoth my master :
'I know ,' quoth he , 'no house , no wife , no mistress .' 
So that my errand , due unto my tongue ,
I thank him , I bear home upon my shoulders ;
For , in conclusion , he did beat me there .

Go back again , thou slave , and fetch him home .

Go back again , and be new beaten home ?
For God's sake , send some other messenger .

Back , slave , or I will break thy pate across .

And he will bless that cross with other beating :
Between you , I shall have a holy head .

Hence , prating peasant ! fetch thy master home .

Am I so round with you as you with me ,
That like a football you do spurn me thus ?
You spurn me hence , and he will spurn me hither :
If I last in this service , you must case me in leather .


Fie , how impatience loureth in your face !

His company must do his minions grace ,
Whilst I at home starve for a merry look .
Hath homely age the alluring beauty took 
From my poor cheek ? then , he hath wasted it :
Are my discourses dull ? barren my wit ?
If voluble and sharp discourse be marr'd ,
Unkindness blunts it more than marble hard :
Do their gay vestments his affections bait ?
That's not my fault ; he's master of my state :
What ruins are in me that can be found 
By him not ruin'd ? then is he the ground 
Of my defeatures . My decayed fair 
A sunny look of his would soon repair ;
But , too unruly deer , he breaks the pale 
And feeds from home : poor I am but his stale .

Self-harming jealousy ! fie ! beat it hence .

Unfeeling fools can with such wrengs dispense .
I know his eye doth homage otherwhere ,
Or else what lets it but he would be here ?
Sister , you know he promis'd me a chain :
Would that alone , alone he would detain ,
So he would keep fair quarter with his bed !
I see , the jewel best enamelled 
Will lose his beauty ; and though gold bides still 
That others touch , yet often touching will 
Wear gold ; and no man that hath a name ,
By falsehood and corruption doth it shame .
Since that my beauty cannot please his eye ,
I'll weep what's left away , and weeping die .

How many fond fools serve mad jealousy !


The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up 
Safe at the Centaur ; and the heedful slave 
Is wander'd forth , in care to seek me out .
By computation , and mine host's report ,
I could not speak with Dromio since at first 
I sent him from the mart . See , here he comes .


How now , sir ! is your merry humour alter'd ?
As you love strokes , so jest with me again .
You know no Centaur ? You receiv'd no gold ?
Your mistress sent to have me home to dinner ?
My house was at the Ph nix ? Wast thou mad ,

That thus so madly thou didst answer me ?

What answer , sir ? when spake I such a word ?

Even now , even here , not half-an-hour since .

I did not see you since you sent me hence ,
Home to the Centaur , with the gold you gave me .

Villain , thou didst deny the gold's receipt ,
And told'st me of a mistress and a dinner ;
For which , I hope , thou felt'st I was displeas'd .

I am glad to see you in this merry vein :
What means this jest ? I pray you , master , tell me .

Yea , dost thou jeer , and flout me in the teeth ?
Think'st thou I jest ? Hold , take thou that , and that .


Hold , sir , for God's sake ! now your jest is earnest .
Upon what bargain do you give it me ?

Because that I familiarly sometimes 
Do use you for my fool , and chat with you ,
Your sauciness will jest upon my love ,
And make a common of my serious hours .
When the sun shines let foolish gnats make sport ,
But creep in crannies when he hides his beams .
If you will jest with me , know my aspect ,
And fashion your demeanour to my looks ,
Or I will beat this method in your sconce .

Sconce , call you it ? so you would leave battering , I had rather have it a head : an you use these blows long , I must get a sconce for my head and insconce it too ; or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders . But , I pray , sir , why am I beaten ?

Dost thou not know ?

Nothing , sir , but that I am beaten .

Shall I tell you why ?

Ay , sir , and wherefore ; for they say every why hath a wherefore .

Why , first ,for flouting me ; and then , wherefore ,
For urging it the second time to me .

Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season ,
When , in the why and the wherefore is neither rime nor reason ?
Well , sir , I thank you .

Thank me , sir ! for what ?

Marry , sir , for this something that you gave me for nothing .

I'll make you amends next , to give you nothing for something . But say , sir , is it dinner-time ?

No , sir : I think the meat wants that I have 

In good time , sir ; what's that ?

Basting .

Well , sir , then 'twill be dry .

If it be , sir , I pray you eat none of it .

Your reason ?

Lest it make you choleric , and purchase me another dry basting .

Well , sir , learn to jest in good time : there's a time for all things .

I durst have denied that , before you were so choleric .

By what rule , sir ?

Marry , sir , by a rule as plain as the plain bald pate of Father Time himself .

Let's hear it .

There's no time for a man to recover his hair that grows bald by nature .

May he not do it by fine and recovery ?

Yes , to pay a fine for a periwig and recover the lost hair of another man .

Why is Time such a niggard of hair , being , as it is , so plentiful an excrement ?

Because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts : and what he hath scanted men in hair , he hath given them in wit .

Why , but there's many a man hath more hair than wit .

Not a man of those but he hath the wit to lose his hair .

Why , thou didst conclude hairy men plain dealers without wit .

The plainer dealer , the sooner lost : yet be loseth it in a kind of jollity .

For what reason ?

For two ; and sound ones too .

Nay , not sound , I pray you .

Sure ones then .

Nay , not sure , in a thing falsing .

Certain ones , then .

Name them .

The one , to save the money that he spends in tiring ; the other , that at dinner they should not drop in his porridge .

You would all this time have proved there is no time for all things .

Marry , and did , sir ; namely , no time to recover hair lost by nature .

But your reason was not substantial , why there is not time to recover .

Thus I mend it : Time himself is bald , and therefore to the world's end will have bald followers .

I knew 'twould be a bald conclusion .
But soft ! who wafts us yonder ?


Ay , ay , Antipholus , look strange , and frown :
Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects ,
I am not Adriana , nor thy wife .
The time was once when thou unurg'd wouldst vow 
That never words were music to thine ear ,
That never object pleasing in thine eye ,
That never touch well welcome to thy hand ,
That never meat sweet-savour'd in thy taste ,
Unless I spake , or look'd , or touch'd , or carv'd to thee .
How comes it now , my husband , O ! how comes it ,
That thou art thus estranged from thyself ?
Thyself I call it , being strange to me ,
That , undividable , incorporate ,
Am better than thy dear self's better part .
Ah ! do not tear away thyself from me ,
For know , my love , as easy mayst thou fall 
A drop of water in the breaking gulf ,
And take unmingled thence that drop again ,
Without addition or diminishing ,
As take from me thyself and not me too .
How dearly would it touch thee to the quick ,
Shouldst thou but hear I were licentious ,
And that this body , consecrate to thee ,
By ruffian lust should be contaminate !
Wouldst thou not spit at me and spurn at me ,
And hurl the name of husband in my face ,
And tear the stain'd skin off my harlot-brow ,
And from my false hand cut the wedding-ring 
And break it with a deep-divorcing vow ?
I know thou canst ; and therefore , see thou do it .
I am possess'd with an adulterate blot ;
My blood is mingled with the crime of lust :
For if we two be one and thou play false ,
I do digest the poison of thy flesh ,
Being strumpeted by thy contagion .
Keep then fair league and truce with thy true bed ;
I live unstain'd , thou undishonoured .

Plead you to me , fair dame ? I know you not :
In Ephesus I am but two hours old ,
As strange unto your town as to your talk ;
Who , every word by all my wit being scann'd ,
Want wit in all one word to understand .

Fie , brother : how the world is chang'd with you !
When were you wont to use my sister thus ?
She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner .

By Dromio ?

By me ?

By thee ; and this thou didst return from him ,
That he did buffet thee , and in his blows ,
Denied my house for his , me for his wife .

Did you converse , sir , with this gentle-woman ?
What is the course and drift of your compact ?

I , sir ? I never saw her till this time .

Villain , thou liest ; for even her very words 
Didst thou deliver to me on the mart .

I never spake with her in all my life .

How can she thus then , call us by our names ,
Unless it be by inspiration ?

How ill agrees it with your gravity 
To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave ,
A betting him to thwart me in my mood !
Be it my wrong you are from me exempt ,
But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt .
Come , I will fasten on this sleeve of thine ;
Thou art an elm , my husband , I a vine ,
Whose weakness , married to thy stronger state ,
Makes me with thy strength to communicate :
If aught possess thee from me , it is dross ,
Usurping ivy , brier , or idle moss ;
Who , all for want of pruning , with intrusion 
Infect thy sap and live on thy confusion .

To me she speaks ; she moves me for her theme !
What ! was I married to her in my dream ?
Or sleep I now and think I hear all this ?
What error drives our eyes and ears amiss ?
Until I know this sure uncertainty ,
I'll entertain the offer'd fallacy .

Dromio , go bid the servants spread for dinner 

O , for my beads ! I cross me for a sinner .
This is the fairy land : O ! spite of spites .
We talk with goblins , owls , and elvish sprites :
If we obey them not , this will ensue ,
They'll suck our breath , or pinch us black and blue .

Why prat'st thou to thyself and answer'st not ?
Dromio , thou drone , thou snail , thou slug , thou sot !

I am transformed , master , am not I ?

I think thou art , in mind , and so am I .

Nay , master , both in mind and in my shape .

Thou hast thine own form .

No , I am an ape .

If thou art chang'd to aught , 'tis to an ass .

'Tis true ; she rides me and I long for grass .
'Tis so , I am an ass ; else it could never be 
But I should know her as well as she knows me .

Come , come ; no longer will I be a fool ,
To put the finger in the eye and weep ,
Whilst man and master laugh my woes to scorn .
Come , sir , to dinner . Dromio , keep the gate .
Husband , I'll dine above with you to-day ,
And shrive you of a thousand idle pranks .
Sirrah , if any ask you for your master ,
Say he dines forth , and let no creature enter .
Come , sister . Dromio , play the porter well .

Am I in earth , in heaven , or in hell ?
Sleeping or waking ? mad or well-advis'd ?
Known unto these , and to myself disguis'd !
I'll say as they say , and persever so ,
And in this mist at all adventures go .

Master , shall I be porter at the gate ?

Ay ; and let none enter , lest I break your pate .

Come , come , Antipholus ; we dine too late .

Good Signior Angelo , you must excuse us all ;
My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours ;
Say that I linger'd with you at your shop 
To see the making of her carkanet ,
And that to-morrow you will bring it home .
But here's a villain , that would face me down 
He met me on the mart , and that I beat him ,
And charg'd him with a thousand marks in gold ,
And that I did deny my wife and house .
Thou drunkard , thou , what didst thou mean by this ?

Say what you will , sir , but I know what I know ;
That you beat me at the mart , I have your hand to show :
If the skin were parchment and the blows you gave were ink ,
Your own handwriting would tell you what I think .

I think thou art an ass .

Marry , so it doth appear 
By the wrongs I suffer and the blows I bear .
I should kick , being kick'd ; and , being at that pass ,
You would keep from my heels and beware of an ass .

You are sad , Signior Balthazar : pray God , our cheer 
May answer my good will and your good welcome here .

I hold your dainties cheap , sir , and your welcome dear .

O , Signior Balthazar , either at flesh or fish ,
A table-full of welcome makes scarce one dainty dish .

Good meat , sir , is common ; that every churl affords .

And welcome more common , for that's nothing but words .

Small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast .

Ay , to a niggardly host and more sparing guest :
But though my cates be mean , take them in good part ;
Better cheer may you have , but not with better heart .
But soft ! my door is lock'd . Go bid them let us in .

Maud , Bridget , Marian , Cicely , Gillian , Ginn !

Mome , malt-horse , capon , coxcomb , idiot , patch !
Either get thee from the door or sit down at the hatch .
Dost thou conjure for wenches , that thou call'st for such store ,
When one is one too many ? Go , get thee from the door .

What patch is made our porter ?My master stays in the street .

Let him walk from whence he came , lest he catch cold on's feet .

Who talks within there ? ho ! open the door .

Right , sir ; I'll tell you when , an you'll tell me wherefore .

Wherefore ? for my dinner : I have not din'd to-day .

Nor to-day here you must not ; come again when you may .

What art thou that keep'st me out from the house I owe ?

The porter for this time , sir , and my name is Dromio .

O villain ! thou hast stolen both mine office and my name :
The one ne'er got me credit , the other mickle blame .
If thou hadst been Dromio to-day in my place ,
Thou wouldst have chang'd thy face for a name , or thy name for an ass .

What a coil is there , Dromio ! who are those at the gate ?

Let my master in , Luce .

Faith , no ; he comes too late ;
And so tell your master .

O Lord ! I must laugh .
Have at you with a proverb : Shall I set in my staff ?

Have at you with another : that's when ? can you tell ?

If thy name be call'd Luce ,Luce , thou hast answer'd him well .

Do you hear , you minion ? you'll let us in , I trow ?

I thought to have ask'd you .

And you said , no .

So come , help : well struck ! there was blow for blow .

Thou baggage , let me in .

Can you tell for whose sake ?

Master , knock the door hard .

Let him knock till it ache .

You'll cry for this , minion , if I beat the door down .

What needs all that , and a pair of stocks in the town ?

Who is that at the door that keeps all this noise ?

By my troth your town is troubled with unruly boys .

Are you there , wife ? you might have come before .

Your wife , sir knave ! go , get you from the door .

If you went in pain , master , this 'knave' would go sore .

Here is neither cheer , sir , nor welcome : we would fain have either .

In debating which was best , we shall part with neither .

They stand at the door , master : bid them welcome hither .

There is something in the wind , that we cannot get in .

You would say so , master , if your garments were thin .
Your cake here is warm within ; you stand here in the cold :
It would make a man mad as a buck to be so bought and sold .

Go fetch me something : I'll break ope the gate .

Break any breaking here , and I'll break your knave's pate .

A man may break a word with you , sir , and words are but wind :
Ay , and break it in your face , so he break it not behind .

It seems thou wantest breaking : out upon thee , hind !

Here's too much 'out upon thee !' I pray thee , let me in .

Ay , when fowls have no feathers , and fish have no fin .

Well , I'll break in . Go borrow me a crow .

A crow without feather ? Master , mean you so ?
For a fish without a fin , there's a fowl without a feather :
If a crow help us in , sirrah , we'll pluck a crow together .

Go get thee gone : fetch me an iron crow .

Have patience , sir ; O ! let it not be so ;
Herein you war against your reputation ,
And draw within the compass of suspect 
The unviolated honour of your wife .
Once this ,your long experience of her wisdom ,
Her sober virtue , years , and modesty ,
Plead on her part some cause to you unknown ;
And doubt not , sir , but she will well excuse 
Why at this time the doors are made against you .
Be rul'd by me : depart in patience ,
And let us to the Tiger all to dinner ;
And about evening come yourself alone ,
To know the reason of this strange restraint .
If by strong hand you offer to break in 
Now in the stirring passage of the day ,
A vulgar comment will be made of it ,
And that supposed by the common rout 
Against your yet ungalled estimation ,
That may with foul intrusion enter in 
And dwell upon your grave when you are dead ;
For slander lives upon succession ,
For ever housed where it gets possession .

You have prevail'd : I will depart in quiet ,
And , in despite of mirth , mean to be merry .
I know a wench of excellent discourse ,
Pretty and witty , wild and yet , too , gentle :
There will we dine : this woman that I mean ,
My wife ,but , I protest , without desert ,
Hath oftentimes upbraided me withal :
To her will we to dinner .

Get you home ,
And fetch the chain ; by this I know 'tis made :
Bring it , I pray you , to the Porpentine ;
For there's the house : that chain will I bestow ,
Be it for nothing but to spite my wife ,
Upon mine hostess there . Good sir , make haste .
Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me ,
I'll knock elsewhere , to see if they'll disdain me .

I'll meet you at that place some hour hence .

Do so . This jest shall cost me some expense .


And may it be that you have quite forgot A husband's office ? Shall , Antipholus ,
Even in the spring of love , thy love-springs rot ?
Shall love , in building , grow so ruinous ?
If you did wed my sister for her wealth ,
Then , for her wealth's sake use her with more kindness :
Or , if you like elsewhere , do it by stealth ;
Muffle your false love with some show of blindness ;
Let not my sister read it in your eye ;
Be not thy tongue thy own shame's orator ;
Look sweet , speak fair , become disloyalty ;
Apparel vice like virtue's harbinger ;
Bear a fair presence , though your heart be tainted ;
Teach sin the carriage of a holy saint ;
Be secret-false : what need she be acquainted ?
What simple thief brags of his own attaint ?
'Tis double wrong to truant with your bed ,
And let her read it in thy looks at board :
Shame hath a bastard fame , well managed ;
Ill deeds are doubled with an evil word .
Alas ! poor women , make us but believe ,
Being compact of credit , that you love us ;
Though others have the arm , show us the sleeve ;
We in your motion turn , and you may move us .
Then , gentle brother , get you in again ;
Comfort my sister , cheer her , call her wife :
'Tis holy sport to be a little vain ,
When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife .

Sweet mistress ,what your name is else , I know not ,
Nor by what wonder you do hit of mine ,
Less in your knowledge and your grace you show not 
Than our earth's wonder ; more than earth divine .
Teach me , dear creature , how to think and speak :
Lay open to my earthy-gross conceit ,
Smother'd in errors , feeble , shallow , weak ,
The folded meaning of your words' deceit .
Against my soul's pure truth why labour you 
To make it wander in an unknown field ?
Are you a god ? would you create me new ?
Transform me then , and to your power I'll yield .
But if that I am I , then well I know 
Your weeping sister is no wife of mine ,
Nor to her bed no homage do I owe :
Far more , far more , to you do I decline .
O ! train me not , sweet mermaid , with thy note ,
To drown me in thy sister flood of tears :
Sing , siren , for thyself , and I will dote :
Spread o'er the silver waves thy golden hairs ,
And as a bed I'll take them and there lie ;
And , in that glorious supposition think 
He gains by death that hath such means to die :
Let Love , being light , be drowned if she sink !

What ! are you mad , that you do reason so ?

Not mad , but mated ; how , I do not know .

It is a fault that springeth from your eye .

For gazing on your beams ; fair sun , being by .

Gaze where you should , and that will clear your sight .

As good to wink , sweet love , as look on night .

Why call you me love ? call my sister so .

Thy sister's sister .

That's my sister .

No ;
It is thyself , mine own self's better part ;
Mine eye's clear eye , my dear heart's dearer heart ;
My food , my fortune , and my sweet hope's aim ,
My sole earth's heaven , and my heaven's claim .

All this my sister is , or else should be .

Call thyself sister , sweet , for I aim thee .
Thee will I love and with thee lead my life :
Thou hast no husband yet nor I no wife .
Give me thy hand .

O ! soft , sir ; hold you still :
I'll fetch my sister , to get her good will .

Why , how now , Dromio ! where run'st thou so fast ?

Do you know me , sir ? am I Dromio ? am I your man ? am I myself ?

Thou art Dromio , thou art my man , thou art thyself .

I am an ass , I am a woman's man and besides myself .

What woman's man ? and how besides thyself ?

Marry , sir , besides myself , I am due to a woman ; one that claims me , one that haunts me , one that will have me .

What claim lays she to thee ?

Marry , sir , such claim as you would lay to your horse ; and she would have me as a beast : not that , I being a beast , she would have me ; but that she , being a very beastly creature , lays claim to me .

What is she ?

A very reverent body ; aye , such a one as a man may not speak of , without he say , 'Sir-reverence .' I have but lean luck in the match , and yet is she a wondrous fat marriage .

How dost thou mean a fat marriage ?

Marry , sir , she's the kitchen-wench , and all grease ; and I know not what use to put her to but to make a lamp of her and run from her by her own light . I warrant her rags and the tallow in them will burn a Poland winter ; if she lives till doomsday , she'll burn a week longer than the whole world .

What complexion is she of ?

Swart , like my shoe , but her face nothing like so clean kept : for why she sweats ; a man may go over shoes in the grime of it .

That's a fault that water will mend .

No , sir , 'tis in grain ; Noah's flood could not do it .

What's her name ?

Nell , sir ; but her name and three quarters ,that is , an ell and three quarters ,will not measure her from hip to hip .

Then she bears some breadth ?

No longer from head to foot than from hip to hip : she is spherical , like a globe ; I could find out countries in her .

In what part of her body stands Ireland ?

Marry , sir , in her buttocks : I found it out by the bogs .

Where Scotland ?

I found it by the barrenness ; hard in the palm of the hand .

Where France ?

In her forehead ; armed and reverted , making war against her heir .

Where England ?

I looked for the chalky cliffs , but I could find no whiteness in them : but I guess it stood in her chin , by the salt rheum that ran between France and it .

Where Spain ?

Faith , I saw not ; but I felt it hot in her breath .

Where America , the Indies ?

O , sir ! upon her nose , all o'er embellished with rubies , carbuncles , sapphires , declining their rich aspect to the hot breath of Spain , who sent whole armadoes of caracks to be ballast at her nose .

Where stood Belgia , the Netherlands ?

O , sir ! I did not look so low . To conclude , this drudge , or diviner , laid claim to me ; call'd me Dromio ; swore I was assured to her ; told me what privy marks I had about me , as the mark of my shoulder , the mole in my neck , the great wart on my left arm , that I , amazed , ran from her as a witch .
And , I think , if my breast had not been made of faith and my heart of steel ,
She had transform'd me to a curtal dog and made me turn i' the wheel .

Go hie thee presently post to the road :
An if the wind blow any way from shore ,
I will not harbour in this town to-night :
If any bark put forth , come to the mart ,
Where I will walk till thou return to me .
If every one knows us and we know none ,
'Tis time , I think , to trudge , pack , and be gone .

As from a bear a man would run for life ,
So fly I from her that would be my wife .


There's none but witches do inhabit here ,
And therefore 'tis high time that I were hence .
She that doth call me husband , even my soul 
Doth for a wife abhor ; but her fair sister ,
Possess'd with such a gentle sovereign grace ,
Of such enchanting presence and discourse ,
Hath almost made me traitor to myself :
But , lest myself be guilty to self-wrong ,
I'll stop mine ears against the mermaid's song .


Master Antipholus !

Ay , that's my name .

I know it well , sir : lo , here is the chain .
I thought to have ta'en you at the Porpentine ;
The chain unfinish'd made me stay thus long .

What is your will that I shall do with this ?

What please yourself , sir : I have made it for you .

Made it for me , sir ! I bespoke it not 

Not once , nor twice , but twenty times you have .
Go home with it and please your wife withal ;
And soon at supper-time I'll visit you ,
And then receive my money for the chain .

I pray you , sir , receive the money now ,
For fear you ne'er see chain nor money more .

You are a merry man , sir : fare you well .


What I should think of this , I cannot tell :
But this I think , there's no man is so vain 
That would refuse so fair an offer'd chain .
I see , a man here needs not live by shifts ,
When in the streets he meets such golden gifts .
I'll to the mart , and there for Dromio stay :
If any ship put out , then straight away .

You know since Pentecost the sum is due ,
And since I have not much importun'd you ;
Nor now I had not , but that I am bound 
To Persia , and want guilders for my voyage :
Therefore make present satisfaction ,
Or I'll attach you by this officer .

Even just the sum that I do owe to you 
Is growing to me by Antipholus ;
And in the instant that I met with you 
He had of me a chain : at five o'clock 
I shall receive the money for the same .
Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house ,
I will discharge my bond , and thank you too .


That labour may you save : see where he comes .

While I go to the goldsmith's house , go thou 
And buy a rope's end , that I will bestow 
Among my wife and her confederates ,
For locking me out of my doors by day .
But soft ! I see the goldsmith . Get thee gone ;
Buy thou a rope , and bring it home to me .

I buy a thousand pound a year : I buy a rope !


A man is well holp up that trusts to you :
I promised your presence and the chain ;
But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me .
Belike you thought our love would last too long ,
If it were chain'd together , and therefore came not .

Saving your merry humour , here's the note 
How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat .
The fineness of the gold , and chargeful fashion ,
Which doth amount to three odd ducats more 
Than I stand debted to this gentleman :
I pray you see him presently discharg'd ,
For he is bound to sea and stays but for it .

I am not furnish'd with the present money ;
Besides , I have some business in the town .
Good signior , take the stranger to my house ,
And with you take the chain , and bid my wife 
Disburse the sum on the receipt thereof :
Perchance I will be there as soon as you .

Then , you will bring the chain to her yourself ?

No ; bear it with you , lest I come not time enough .

Well , sir , I will . Have you the chain about you ?

An if I have not , sir , I hope you have ,
Or else you may return without your money .

Nay , come , I pray you , sir , give me the chain :
Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman ,
And I , to blame , have held him here too long .

Good Lord ! you use this dalliance to excuse 
Your breach of promise to the Porpentine .
I should have child you for not bringing it ,
But , like a shrew , you first begin to brawl .

The hour steals on ; I pray you , sir , dispatch .

You hear how he importunes me : the chain !

Why , give it to my wife and fetch your money .

Come , come ; you know I gave it you even now .
Either send the chain or send by me some token .

Fie ! now you run this humour out of breath .
Come , where's the chain ? I pray you , let me see it .

My business cannot brook this dalliance .
Good sir , say whe'r you'll answer me or no :
If not , I'll leave him to the officer .

I answer you ! what should I answer you ?

The money that you owe me for the chain .

I owe you none till I receive the chain .

You know I gave it you half an hour since .

You gave me none : you wrong me much to say so .

You wrong me more , sir , in denying it :
Consider how it stands upon my credit .

Well , officer , arrest him at my suit .

I do ;
And charge you in the duke's name to obey me .

This touches me in reputation .
Either consent to pay this sum for me ,
Or I attach you by this officer .

Consent to pay thee that I never had !
Arrest me , foolish fellow , if thou dar'st .

Here is thy fee : arrest him , officer .
I would not spare my brother in this case ,
If he should scorn me so apparently .

I do arrest you , sir : you hear the suit .

I do obey thee till I give thee bail .
But , sirrah , you shall buy this sport as dear 
As all the metal in your shop will answer .

Sir , sir , I shall have law in Ephesus ,
To your notorious shame , I doubt it not .


Master , there is a bark of Epidamnum 
That stays but till her owner comes aboard ,
And then she bears away . Our fraughtage , sir ,
I have convey'd aboard , and I have bought 
The oil , the balsamum , and aqua-vit .
The ship is in her trim ; the merry wind 
Blows fair from land ; they stay for nought at all 
But for their owner , master , and yourself .

How now ! a madman ! Why , thou peevish sheep ,
What ship of Epidamnum stays for me ?

A ship you sent me to , to hire waftage .

Thou drunken slave , I sent thee for a rope ;
And told thee to what purpose , and what end .

You sent me for a rope's end as soon :
You sent me to the bay , sir , for a bark .

I will debate this matter at more leisure ,
And teach your ears to list me with more heed .
To Adriana , villain , hie thee straight ;
Give her this key , and tell her , in the desk 
That's cover'd o'er with Turkish tapestry ,
There is a purse of ducats : let her send it .
Tell her I am arrested in the street ,
And that shall bail me . Hie thee , slave , be gone !
On , officer , to prison till it come .


To Adriana ! that is where we din'd ,
Where Dowsabel did claim me for her husband :
She is too big , I hope , for me to compass .
Thither I must , although against my will ,
For servants must their masters' minds fulfil .


Ah ! Luciana , did he tempt thee so ?
Mights thou perceive austerely in his eye 
That he did plead in earnest ? yea or no ?
Look'd he or red or pale ? or sad or merrily ?
What observation mad'st thou in this case 
Of his heart's meteors tilting in his face ?

First he denied you had in him no right .

He meant he did me none ; the more my spite .

Then swore he that he was a stranger here .

And true he swore , though yet forsworn he were .

Then pleaded I for you .

And what said he ?

That love I begg'd for you he begg'd of me .

With what persuasion did he tempt thy love ?

With words that in an honest suit might move .
First , he did praise my beauty , then my speech .

Didst speak him fair ?

Have patience , I beseech .

I cannot , nor I will not hold me still :
My tongue , though not my heart , shall have his will .
He is deformed , crooked , old and sere ,
Ill-fac'd , worse bodied , shapeless every where :
Vicious , ungentle , foolish , blunt , unkind ,
Stigmatical in making , worse in mind .

Who would be jealous then , of such a one ?
No evil lost is wail'd when it is gone .

Ah ! but I think him better than I say ,
And yet would herein others' eyes were worse .
Far from her nest the lapwing cries away :
My heart prays for him , though my tongue do curse .


Here , go : the desk ! the purse ! sweet , now , make haste .

How hast thou lost thy breath ?

By running fast .

Where is thy master , Dromio ? is he well ?

No , he's in Tartar limbo , worse than hell .
A devil in an everlasting garment hath him ,
One whose hard heart is button'd up with steel ;
A fiend , a fairy , pitiless and rough ;
A wolf , nay , worse , a fellow all in buff ;
A back-friend , a shoulder-clapper , one that countermands 
The passages of alleys , creeks and narrow lands ;
A hound that runs counter and yet draws dryfoot well ;
One that , before the judgment , carries poor souls to hell .

Why , man , what is the matter ?

I do not know the matter : he is 'rested on the case .

What , is he arrested ? tell me at whose suit .

I know not at whose suit he is arrested well ;
But he's in a suit of buff which 'rested him , that can I tell .
Will you send him , mistress , redemption , the money in his desk ?

Go fetch it , sister .

This I wonder at :
That he , unknown to me , should be in debt :
Tell me , was he arrested on a band ?

Not on a band , but on a stronger thing ;
A chain , a chain . Do you not hear it ring ?

What , the chain ?

No , no , the bell : 'tis time that I were gone :
It was two ere I left him , and now the clock strikes one .

The hours come back ! that did I never hear .

O yes ; if any hour meet a sergeant , a' turns back for very fear .

As if Time were in debt ! how fondly dost thou reason !

Time is a very bankrupt , and owes more than he's worth to season .
Nay , he's a thief too : have you not heard men say ,
That Time comes stealing on by night and day ?
If Time be in debt and theft , and a sergeant in the way ,
Hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day ?


Go , Dromio : there's the money , bear it straight ,
And bring thy master home immediately .
Come , sister ; I am press'd down with conceit ; Conceit , my comfort and my injury .


There's not a man I meet but doth salute me ,
As if I were their well acquainted friend ;
And every one doth call me by my name .
Some tender money to me ; some invite me ;
Some other give me thanks for kindnesses ;
Some offer me commodities to buy :
Even now a tailor call'd me in his shop 
And show'd me silks that he had bought for me ,
And therewithal , took measure of my body .
Sure these are but imaginary wiles ,
And Lapland sorcerers inhabit here .


Master , here's the gold you sent me for .
What ! have you got the picture of old Adam new apparelled ?

What gold is this ? What Adam dost thou mean ?

Not that Adam that kept the Paradise , but that Adam that keeps the prison : he that goes in the calf's skin that was killed for the Prodigal : he that came behind you , sir , like an evil angel , and bid you forsake your liberty .

I understand thee not .

No ? why , 'tis a plain case : he that went , like a base-viol , in a case of leather ; the man , sir , that , when gentlemen are tired , gives them a fob , and 'rests them ; he , sir , that takes pity on decayed men and gives them suits of durance ; he that sets up his rest to do more exploits with his mace than a morris-pike .

What , thou meanest an officer ?

Ay , sir , the sergeant of the band ; he that brings any man to answer it that breaks his band ; one that thinks a man always going to bed , and says , 'God give you good rest !' 

Well , sir , there rest in your foolery . Is there any ship puts forth to-night ? may we be gone ?

Why , sir , I brought you word an hour since that the bark Expedition put forth to-night ; and then were you hindered by the sergeant to tarry for the hoy Delay . Here are the angels that you sent for to deliver you .

The fellow is distract , and so am I ;
And here we wander in illusions :
Some blessed power deliver us from hence !


Well met , well met , Master Antipholus .
I see , sir , you have found the goldsmith now :
Is that the chain you promis'd me to-day ?

Satan , avoid ! I charge thee tempt me not !

Master , is this Mistress Satan ?

It is the devil .

Nay , she is worse , she is the devil's dam , and here she comes in the habit of a light wench : and thereof comes that the wenches say , 'God damn me ;' that's as much as to say , 'God make me a light wench .' It is written , they appear to men like angels of light : light is an effect of fire , and fire will burn ; ergo , light wenches will burn . Come not near her .

Your man and you are marvellous merry , sir . Will you go with me ? we'll mend our dinner here .

Master , if you do , expect spoon-meat , so bespeak a long spoon .

Why , Dromio ?

Marry , he must have a long spoon that must eat with the devil .

Avoid thee , fiend ! what tell'st thou me of supping ?
Thou art , as you are all , a sorceress :
I conjure thee to leave me and be gone .

Give me the ring of mine you had at dinner ,
Or , for my diamond , the chain you promis'd ,
And I'll be gone , sir , and not trouble you .

Some devils ask but the parings of one's nail ,
A rush , a hair , a drop of blood , a pin ,
A nut , a cherry-stone ;
But she , more covetous , would have a chain .
Master , be wise : an if you give it her ,
The devil will shake her chain and fright us with it .

I pray you , sir , my ring , or else the chain :
I hope you do not mean to cheat me so .

Avaunt , thou witch ! Come , Dromio , let us go .

'Fly pride ,' says the peacock : mistress , that you know .


Now , out of doubt , Antipholus is mad ,
Else would he never so demean himself .
A ring he hath of mine worth forty ducats ,
And for the same he promis'd me a chain :
Both one and other he denies me now .
The reason that I gather he is mad ,
Besides this present instance of his rage ,
Is a mad tale he told to-day at dinner ,
Of his own doors being shut against his entrance 
Belike his wife , acquainted with his fits ,
On purpose shut the doors against his way .
My way is now to hie home to his house ,
And tell his wife , that , being lunatic ,
He rush'd into my house , and took perforce 
My ring away . This course I fittest choose ,
For forty ducats is too much to lose .


Fear me not , man ; I will not break away :
I'll give thee , ere I leave thee , so much money ,
To warrant thee , as I am 'rested for .
My wife is in a wayward mood to-day ,
And will not lightly trust the messenger .
That I should be attach'd in Ephesus ,
I tell you , 'twill sound harshly in her ears .


Here comes my man : I think he brings the money .

How now , sir ! have you that I sent you for ?

Here's that , I warrant you , will pay them all .

But where's the money ?

Why , sir , I gave the money for the rope .

Five hundred ducats , villain , for a rope ?

I'll serve you , sir , five hundred at the rate .

To what end did I bid thee hie thee home ?

To a rope's end , sir ; and to that end am I return'd .

And to that end , sir , I will welcome you .


Good sir , be patient .

Nay , 'tis for me to be patient ; I am in adversity .

Good now , hold thy tongue .

Nay , rather persuade him to hold his hands .

Thou whoreson , senseless villain !

I would I were senseless , sir , that I might not feel your blows .

Thou art sensible in nothing but blows , and so is an ass .

I am an ass indeed ; you may prove it by my long ears . I have served him from the hour of my nativity to this instant , and have nothing at his hands for my service but blows . When I am cold , he heats me with beating ; when I am warm , he cools me with beating ; I am waked with it when I sleep ; raised with it when I sit ; driven out of doors with it when I go from home ; welcomed home with it when I return ; nay , I bear it on my shoulders , as a beggar wont her brat ; and , I think , when he hath lamed me , I shall beg with it from door to door .

Come , go along ; my wife is coming yonder .


Mistress , respice finem , respect your end ; or rather , to prophesy like the parrot , 'Beware the rope's end .' 

Wilt thou still talk ?


How say you now ? is not your husband mad ?

His incivility confirms no less .
Good Doctor Pinch , you are a conjurer ;
Establish him in his true sense again ,
And I will please you what you will demand .

Alas ! how fiery and how sharp he looks .

Mark how he trembles in his ecstasy !

Give me your hand and let me feel your pulse .

There is my hand , and let it feel your ear .


I charge thee , Satan , hous'd within this man ,
To yield possession to my holy prayers ,
And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight :
I conjure thee by all the saints in heaven .

Peace , doting wizard , peace ! I am not mad .

O ! that thou wert not , poor distressed soul !

You minion , you , are these your customers ?
Did this companion with the saffron face 
Revel and feast it at my house to-day ,
Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut 
And I denied to enter in my house ?

O husband , God doth know you din'd at home ;
Where would you had remain'd until this time .
Free from these slanders and this open shame !

Din'd at home ! Thou villain , what say'st thou ?

Sir , sooth to say , you did not dine at home .

Were not my doors lock'd up and I shut out ?

Perdy , your doors were lock'd and you shut out .

And did not she herself revile me there ?

Sans fable , she herself revil'd you there .

Did not her kitchen-maid rail , taunt , and scorn me ?

Certes , she did ; the kitchen-vestal scorn'd you .

And did not I in rage depart from thence ?

In verity you did : my bones bear witness ,
That since have felt the vigour of his rage .

Is't good to soothe him in these contraries ?

It is no shame : the fellow finds his vein ,
And , yielding to him humours well his frenzy .

Thou hast suborn'd the goldsmith to arrest me .

Alas ! I sent you money to redeem you ,
By Dromio here , who came in haste for it .

Money by me ! heart and good will you might ;
But surely , master , not a rag of money .

Went'st not thou to her for a purse of ducats ?

He came to me , and I deliver'd it .

And I am witness with her that she did .

God and the rope-maker bear me witness 
That I was sent for nothing but a rope !

Mistress , both man and master is possess'd :
I know it by their pale and deadly looks .
They must be bound and laid in some dark room .

Say , wherefore didst thou lock me forth to-day ?
And why dost thou deny the bag of gold ?

I did not , gentle husband , lock thee forth .

And , gentle master , I receiv'd no gold ;
But I confess , sir , that we were lock'd out .

Dissembling villain ! thou speak'st false in both .

Dissembling harlot ! thou art false in all ;
And art confederate with a damned pack 
To make a loathsome abject scorn of me ;
But with these nails I'll pluck out those false eyes 
That would behold in me this shameful sport .

O ! bind him , bind him , let him not come near me .

More company ! the fiend is strong within him .

Ay me ! poor man , how pale and wan he looks !


What , will you murder me ? Thou gaoler , thou ,
I am thy prisoner : wilt thou suffer them 
To make a rescue ?

Masters , let him go :
He is my prisoner , and you shall not have him .

Go bind this man , for he is frantic too .


What wilt thou do , thou peevish officer ?
Hast thou delight to see a wretched man 
Do outrage and displeasure to himself ?

He is my prisoner : if I let him go ,
The debt he owes will be requir'd of me .

I will discharge thee ere I go from thee :
Bear me forthwith unto his creditor ,
And , knowing how the debt grows , I will pay it .
Good Master doctor , see him safe convey'd 
Home to my house . O most unhappy day !

O most unhappy strumpet !

Master , I am here enter'd in bond for you .

Out on thee , villain ! wherefore dost thou mad me ?

Will you be bound for nothing ? be mad , good master ; cry , 'the devil !' 

God help , poor souls ! how idly do they talk .

Go bear him hence . Sister , go you with me .

Say now , whose suit is he arrested at ?

One Angelo , a goldsmith ; do you know him ?

I know the man . What is the sum he owes ?

Two hundred ducats .

Say , how grows it due ?

Due for a chain your husband had of him .

He did bespeak a chain for me , but had it not .

When as your husband all in rage , to-day 
Came to my house , and took away my ring ,
The ring I saw upon his finger now ,
Straight after did I meet him with a chain .

It may be so , but I did never see it .
Come , gaoler , bring me where the goldsmith is :
I long to know the truth hereof at large .


God , for thy mercy ! they are loose again .

And come with naked swords . Let's call more help 
To have them bound again .

Away ! they'll kill us .


I see , these witches are afraid of swords .

She that would be your wife now ran from you .

Come to the Centaur ; fetch our stuff from thence :
I long that we were safe and sound aboard .

Faith , stay here this night , they will surely do us no harm ; you saw they speak us fair , give us gold : methinks they are such a gentle nation , that , but for the mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of me , I could find in my heart to stay here still , and turn witch .

I will not stay to-night for all the town ;
Therefore away , to get our stuff aboard .

I am sorry , sir , that I have hinder'd you ;
But , I protest , he had the chain of me ,
Though most dishonestly he doth deny it .

How is the man esteem'd here in the city ?

Of very reverend reputation , sir ,
Of credit infinite , highly belov'd ,
Second to none that lives here in the city :
His word might bear my wealth at any time .

Speak softly : yonder , as I think , he walks .


'Tis so ; and that self chain about his neck 
Which he forswore most monstrously to have .
Good sir , draw near to me , I'll speak to him .
Signior Antipholus , I wonder much 
That you would put me to this shame and trouble ;
And not without some scandal to yourself ,
With circumstance and oaths so to deny 
This chain which now you wear so openly :
Beside the charge , the shame , imprisonment ,
You have done wrong to this my honest friend ,
Who , but for staying on our controversy ,
Had hoisted sail and put to sea to-day .
This chain you had of me ; can you deny it ?

I think I had : I never did deny it .

Yes , that you did , sir , and forswore it too .

Who heard me to deny it or forswear it ?

These ears of mine , thou know'st , did hear thee .
Fie on thee , wretch ! 'tis pity that thou liv'st 
To walk where any honest men resort .

Thou art a villain to impeach me thus :
I'll prove mine honour and mine honesty 
Against thee presently , if thou dar'st stand .

I dare , and do defy thee for a villain .

Hold ! hurt him not , for God's sake ! he is mad .
Some get within him , take his sword away .
Bind Dromio too , and bear them to my house .

Run , master , run ; for God's sake , take a house !
This is some priory : in , or we are spoil'd .

Be quiet , people . Wherefore throng you hither ?

To fetch my poor distracted husband hence .
Let us come in , that we may bind him fast ,
And bear him home for his recovery .

I knew he was not in his perfect wits .

I am sorry now that I did draw on him .

How long hath this possession held the man ?

This week he hath been heavy , sour , sad ,
And much different from the man he was ;
But , till this afternoon his passion 
Ne'er brake into extremity of rage .

Hath he not lost much wealth by wrack of sea ?
Buried some dear friend ? Hath not else his eye 
Stray'd his affection in unlawful love ?
A sin prevailing much in youthful men ,
Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing .
Which of these sorrows is he subject to ?

To none of these , except it be the last ;
Namely , some love that drew him oft from home .

You should for that have reprehended him .

Why , so I did .

Ay , but not rough enough .

As roughly as my modesty would let me .

Haply , in private .

And in assemblies too .

Ay , but not enough .

It was the copy of our conference :
In bed , he slept not for my urging it ;
At board , he fed not for my urging it ;
Alone , it was the subject of my theme ;
In company I often glanced it :
Still did I tell him it was vile and bad .

And thereof came it that the man was mad :
The venom clamours of a jealous woman 
Poison more deadly than a mad dog's tooth .
It seems , his sleeps were hinder'd by thy railing ,
And thereof comes it that his head is light .
Thou say'st his meat was sauc'd with thy upbraidings :
Unquiet meals make ill digestions ;
Thereof the raging fire of fever bred :
And what's a fever but a fit of madness ?
Thou say'st his sports were hinder'd by thy brawls :
Sweet recreation barr'd , what doth ensue 
But moody moping , and dull melancholy ,
Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair ,
And at her heels a huge infectious troop 
Of pale distemperatures and foes to life ?
In food , in sport , and life-preserving rest 
To be disturb'd , would mad or man or beast :
The consequence is then , thy jealous fits 
Have scar'd thy husband from the use of wits .

She never reprehended him but mildly 
When he demean'd himself rough , rude , and wildly .
Why bear you these rebukes and answer not ?

She did betray me to my own reproof .
Good people , enter , and lay hold on him .

No ; not a creature enters in my house .

Then , let your servants bring my husband forth .

Neither : he took this place for sanctuary ,
And it shall privilege him from your hands 
Till I have brought him to his wits again ,
Or lose my labour in assaying it .

I will attend my husband , be his nurse ,
Diet his sickness , for it is my office ,
And will have no attorney but myself ;
And therefore let me have him home with me .

Be patient ; for I will not let him stir 
Till I have us'd the approved means I have ,
With wholesome syrups , drugs , and holy prayers ,
To make of him a formal man again .
It is a branch and parcel of mine oath ,
A charitable duty of my order ;
Therefore depart and leave him here with me .

I will not hence and leave my husband here ;
And ill it doth beseem your holiness 
To separate the husband and the wife .

Be quiet , and depart : thou shalt not have him .


Complain unto the duke of this indignity .

Come , go : I will fall prostrate at his feet ,
And never rise until my tears and prayers 
Have won his Grace to come in person hither ,
And take perforce my husband from the abbess .

By this , I think , the dial points at five :
Anon , I'm sure , the duke himself in person 
Comes this way to the melancholy vale ,
The place of death and sorry execution ,
Behind the ditches of the abbey here .

Upon what cause ?

To see a reverend Syracusian merchant ,
Who put unluckily into this bay 
Against the laws and statutes of this town ,
Beheaded publicly for his offence .

See where they come : we will behold his death .

Kneel to the duke before he pass the abbey .


Yet once again proclaim it publicly ,
If any friend will pay the sum for him ,
He shall not die ; so much we tender him .

Justice , most sacred duke , against the abbess !

She is a virtuous and a reverend lady :
It cannot be that she hath done thee wrong .

May it please your Grace , Antipholus , my husband ,
Whom I made lord of me and all I had ,
At your important letters , this ill day 
A most outrageous fit of madness took him ,
That desperately he hurried through the street ,
With him his bondman , all as mad as he ,
Doing displeasure to the citizens 
By rushing in their houses , bearing thence 
Rings , jewels , anything his rage did like .
Once did I get him bound and sent him home ,
Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went 
That here and there his fury had committed .
Anon , I wot not by what strong escape ,
He broke from those that had the guard of him ,
And with his mad attendant and himself ,
Each one with ireful passion , with drawn swords 
Met us again , and , madly bent on us 
Chas'd us away , till , raising of more aid 
We came again to bind them . Then they fled 
Into this abbey , whither we pursu'd them ;
And here the abbess shuts the gates on us ,
And will not suffer us to fetch him out ,
Nor send him forth that we may bear him hence .
Therefore , most gracious duke , with thy command 
Let him be brought forth , and borne hence for help .

Long since thy husband serv'd me in my wars ,
And I to thee engag'd a prince's word ,
When thou didst make him master of thy bed ,
To do him all the grace and good I could .
Go , some of you , knock at the abbey gate 
And bid the lady abbess come to me .
I will determine this before I stir .


O mistress , mistress ! shift and save yourself !
My master and his man are both broke loose ,
Beaten the maids a-row and bound the doctor ,
Whose beard they have sing'd off with brands of fire ;
And ever as it blaz'd they threw on him 
Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair .
My master preaches patience to him , and the while 
His man with scissors nicks him like a fool ;
And sure , unless you send some present help ,
Between them they will kill the conjurer .

Peace , fool ! thy master and his man are here ,
And that is false thou dost report to us .

Mistress , upon my life , I tell you true ;
I have not breath'd almost , since I did see it .
He cries for you and vows , if he can take you ,
To scotch your face , and to disfigure you .

Hark , hark ! I hear him , mistress : fly , be gone !

Come , stand by me ; fear nothing . Guard with halberds !

Ay me , it is my husband ! Witness you ,
That he is borne about invisible :
Even now we hous'd him in the abbey here ,
And now he's here , past thought of human reason .


Justice , most gracious duke ! O ! grant me justice ,
Even for the service that long since I did thee ,
When I bestrid thee in the wars and took 
Deep scars to save thy life ; even for the blood 
That then I lost for thee , now grant me justice .

Unless the fear of death doth make me dote ,
I see my son Antipholus and Dromio !

Justice , sweet prince , against that woman there !
She whom thou gav'st to me to be my wife ,
That hath abused and dishonour'd me ,
Even in the strength and height of injury !
Beyond imagination is the wrong 
That she this day hath shameless thrown on me .

Discover how , and thou shalt find me just .

This day , great duke , she shut the doors upon me ,
While she with harlots feasted in my house .

A grievous fault ! Say , woman , didst thou so ?

No , my good lord : myself , he , and my sister 
To-day did dine together . So befall my soul 
As this is false he burdens me withal !

Ne'er may I look on day , nor sleep on night ,
But she tells to your highness simple truth !

O perjur'd woman ! They are both forsworn :
In this the madman justly chargeth them !

My liege , I am advised what I say :
Neither disturb'd with the effect of wine ,
Nor heady-rash , provok'd with raging ire ,
Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad .
This woman lock'd me out this day from dinner :
That goldsmith there , were he not pack'd with her ,
Could witness it , for he was with me then ;
Who parted with me to go fetch a chain ,
Promising to bring it to the Porpentine ,
Where Balthazar and I did dine together .
Our dinner done , and he not coming thither ,
I went to seek him : in the street I met him ,
And in his company that gentleman .
There did this perjur'd goldsmith swear me down 
That I this day of him receiv'd the chain ,
Which , God he knows , I saw not ; for the which 
He did arrest me with an officer .
I did obey , and sent my peasant home 
For certain ducats : he with none return'd .
Then fairly I bespoke the officer 
To go in person with me to my house .
By the way we met 
My wife , her sister , and a rabble more 
Of vile confederates : along with them 
They brought one Pinch , a hungry lean-fac'd villain ,
A mere anatomy , a mountebank ,
A threadbare juggler , and a fortune-teller ,
A needy , hollow-ey'd , sharp-looking wretch ,
A living-dead man . This pernicious slave ,
Forsooth , took on him as a conjurer ,
And , gazing in mine eyes , feeling my pulse ,
And with no face , as 'twere , out-facing me ,
Cries out , I was possess'd . Then , altogether 
They fell upon me , bound me , bore me thence ,
And in a dark and dankish vault at home 
There left me and my man , both bound together ;
Till , gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder ,
I gain'd my freedom , and immediately 
Ran hither to your Grace ; whom I beseech 
To give me ample satisfaction 
For these deep shames and great indignities .

My lord , in truth , thus far I witness with him ,
That he din'd not at home , but was lock'd out .

But had he such a chain of thee , or no ?

He had , my lord ; and when he ran in here ,
These people saw the chain about his neck .

Besides , I will be sworn these ears of mine 
Heard you confess you had the chain of him 
After you first forswore it on the mart ;
And thereupon I drew my sword on you ;
And then you fled into this abbey here ,
From whence , I think , you are come by miracle .

I never came within these abbey walls ;
Nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me ;
I never saw the chain , so help me heaven !
And this is false you burden me withal .

Why , what an intricate impeach is this !
I think you all have drunk of Circe's cup .
If here you hous'd him , here he would have been ;
If he were mad , he would not plead so coldly ;
You say he din'd at home ; the goldsmith here 
Denies that saying . Sirrah , what say you ?

Sir , he din'd with her there , at the Porpentine .

He did , and from my finger snatch'd that ring .

'Tis true , my liege ; this ring I had of her .

Saw'st thou him enter at the abbey here ?

As sure , my liege , as I do see your Grace .

Why , this is strange . Go call the abbess hither .

I think you are all mated or stark mad .

Most mighty duke , vouchsafe me speak a word :
Haply I see a friend will save my life ,
And pay the sum that may deliver me .

Speak freely , Syracusian , what thou wilt .

Is not your name , sir , called Antipholus ?
And is not that your bondman Dromio ?

Within this hour I was his bondman , sir ;
But he , I thank him , gnaw'd in two my cords :
Now am I Dromio and his man , unbound .

I am sure you both of you remember me .

Ourselves we do remember , sir , by you ;
For lately we were bound , as you are now .
You are not Pinch's patient , are you , sir ?

Why look you strange on me ? you know me well .

I never saw you in my life till now .

O ! grief hath chang'd me since you saw me last ,
And careful hours , with Time's deformed hand ,
Have written strange defeatures in my face :
But tell me yet , dost thou not know my voice ?

Neither .

Dromio , nor thou ?

No , trust me , sir , not I .

I am sure thou dost .

Ay , sir ; but I am sure I do not ; and whatsoever a man denies , you are now bound to believe him .

Not know my voice ! O , time's extremity ,
Hast thou so crack'd and splitted my poor tongue 
In seven short years , that here my only son 
Knows not my feeble key of untun'd cares ?
Though now this grained face of mine be hid 
In sap-consuming winter's drizzled snow ,
And all the conduits of my blood froze up ,
Yet hath my night of life some memory ,
My wasting lamps some fading glimmer left ,
My dull deaf ears a little use to hear :
All these old witnesses , I cannot err ,
Tell me thou art my son Antipholus .

I never saw my father in my life .

But seven years since , in Syracusa , boy ,
Thou know'st we parted : but perhaps , my son ,
Thou sham'st to acknowledge me in misery .

The duke and all that know me in the city 
Can witness with me that it is not so :
I ne'er saw Syracusa in my life .

I tell thee , Syracusian , twenty years 
Have I been patron to Antipholus ,
During which time he ne'er saw Syracusa .
I see thy age and dangers make thee dote .


Most mighty duke , behold a man much wrong'd .


I see two husbands , or mine eyes deceive me !

One of these men is Genius to the other ;
And so of these : which is the natural man ,
And which the spirit ? Who deciphers them ?

I , sir , am Dromio : command him away .

I , sir , am Dromio : pray let me stay .

geon art thou not ? or else his ghost ?

O ! my old master ; who hath bound him here ?

Whoever bound him , I will loose his bonds ,
And gain a husband by his liberty .
Speak , old  geon , if thou be'st the man 
That hadst a wife once call'd  milia ,
That bore thee at a burden two fair sons .
O ! if thou be'st the same  geon , speak ,
And speak unto the same  milia !

If I dream not , thou art  milia :
If thou art she , tell me where is that son 
That floated with thee on the fatal raft ?

By men of Epidamnum , he and I ,
And the twin Dromio , all were taken up :
But by and by rude fishermen of Corinth 
By force took Dromio and my son from them ,
And me they left with those of Epidamnum .
What then became of them , I cannot tell ;
I to this fortune that you see me in .

Why , here begins his morning story right :
These two Antipholus' , these two so like ,
And these two Dromios , one in semblance ,
Besides her urging of her wrack at sea ;
These are the parents to these children ,
Which accidentally are met together .
Antipholus , thou cam'st from Corinth first ?

No , sir , not I ; I came from Syracuse .

Stay , stand apart ; I know not which is which .

I came from Corinth , my most gracious lord ,

And I with him .

Brought to this town by that most famous warrior ,
Duke Menaphon , your most renowned uncle .

Which of you two did dine with me to-day ?

I , gentle mistress .

And are not you my husband ?

No ; I say nay to that .

And so do I ; yet did she call me so ;
And this fair gentlewoman , her sister here ,
Did call me brother .

What I told you then ,
I hope I shall have leisure to make good ,
If this be not a dream I see and hear .

That is the chain , sir , which you had of me .

I think it be , sir ; I deny it not .

And you , sir , for this chain arrested me .

I think I did , sir ; I deny it not .

I sent you money , sir , to be your bail ,
By Dromio ; but I think he brought it not .

No , none by me .

This purse of ducats I receiv'd from you ,
And Dromio , my man , did bring them me .
I see we still did meet each other's man ,
And I was ta'en for him , and he for me ,
And thereupon these errors are arose .

These ducats pawn I for my father here .

It shall not need : thy father hath his life .

Sir , I must have that diamond from you .

There , take it ; and much thanks for my good cheer .

Renowned duke , vouchsafe to take the pains 
To go with us into the abbey here ,
And hear at large discoursed all our fortunes ;
And all that are assembled in this place ,
That by this sympathized one day's error 
Have suffer'd wrong , go keep us company ,
And we shall make full satisfaction .
Thirty-three years have I but gone in travail 
Of you , my sons ; and , till this present hour 
My heavy burdens ne'er delivered .
The duke , my husband , and my children both ,
And you the calendars of their nativity ,
Go to a gossip's feast , and joy with me :
After so long grief such festivity !

With all my heart I'll gossip at this feast .


Master , shall I fetch your stuff from shipboard ?

Dromio , what stuff of mine hast thou embark'd ?

Your goods that lay at host , sir , in the Centaur .

He speaks to me . I am your master , Dromio :
Come , go with us ; we'll look to that anon :
Embrace thy brother there ; rejoice with him .


There is a fat friend at your master's house ,
That kitchen'd me for you to-day at dinner :
She now shall be my sister , not my wife .

Methinks you are my glass , and not my brother :
I see by you I am a sweet-fac'd youth .
Will you walk in to see their gossiping ?

Not I , sir ; you are my elder .

That's a question : how shall we try it ?

We'll draw cuts for the senior : till then lead thou first .

Nay , then , thus :
We came into the world like brother and brother ;
And now let's go hand in hand , not one before another .

THE MERCHANT OF VENICE

 
In sooth , I know not why I am so sad :
It wearies me ; you say it wearies you ;
But how I caught it , found it , or came by it ,
What stuff 'tis made of , whereof it is born ,
I am to learn ;
And such a want-wit sadness makes of me ,
That I have much ado to know myself .

Your mind is tossing on the ocean ;
There , where your argosies with portly sail ,
Like signiors and rich burghers on the flood ,
Or , as it were , the pageants of the sea ,
Do overpeer the petty traffickers ,
That curtsy to them , do them reverence ,
As they fly by them with their woven wings .

Believe me , sir , had I such venture forth ,
The better part of my affections would 
Be with my hopes abroad . I should be still 
Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind ;
Peering in maps for ports , and piers , and roads ;
And every object that might make me fear 
Misfortune to my ventures , out of doubt 
Would make me sad .

My wind , cooling my broth ,
Would blow me to an ague , when I thought 
What harm a wind too great might do at sea .
I should not see the sandy hour-glass run 
But I should think of shallows and of flats ,
And see my wealthy Andrew dock'd in sand 
Vailing her high-top lower than her ribs 
To kiss her burial . Should I go to church 
And see the holy edifice of stone ,
And not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks ,
Which touching but my gentle vessel's side 
Would scatter all her spices on the stream ,
Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks ;
And , in a word , but even now worth this ,
And now worth nothing ? Shall I have the thought 
To think on this , and shall I lack the thought 
That such a thing bechanc'd would make me sad ?
But tell not me : I know Antonio 
Is sad to think upon his merchandise .

Believe me , no : I thank my fortune for it ,
My ventures are not in one bottom trusted ,
Nor to one place ; nor is my whole estate 
Upon the fortune of this present year :
Therefore , my merchandise makes me not sad .

Why , then you are in love .

Fie , fie !

Not in love neither ? Then let's say you are sad ,
Because you are not merry : and 'twere as easy 
For you to laugh and leap , and say you are merry ,
Because you are not sad . Now , by two-headed Janus ,
Nature hath fram'd strange fellows in her time :
Some that will evermore peep through their eyes 
And laugh like parrots at a bag-piper ,
And other of such vinegar aspect 
That they'll not show their teeth in way of smile ,
Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable .


Here comes Bassanio , your most noble kinsman ,
Gratiano , and Lorenzo . Fare ye well :
We leave you now with better company .

I would have stay'd till I had made you merry ,
If worthier friends had not prevented me .

Your worth is very dear in my regard .
I take it , your own business calls on you ,
And you embrace the occasion to depart .

Good morrow , my good lords .

Good signiors both , when shall we laugh ? say when ?
You grow exceeding strange : must it be so ?

We'll make our leisures to attend on yours .


My Lord Bassanio , since you have found Antonio ,
We too will leave you ; but , at dinner-time ,
I pray you , have in mind where we must meet .

I will not fail you .

You look not well , Signior Antonio ;
You have too much respect upon the world :
They lose it that do buy it with much care :
Believe me , you are marvellously chang'd .

I hold the world but as the world , Gratiano ;
A stage where every man must play a part ,
And mine a sad one .

Let me play the fool :
With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come ,
And let my liver rather heat with wine 
Than my heart cool with mortifying groans .
Why should a man , whose blood is warm within ,
Sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster ?
Sleep when he wakes , and creep into the jaundice 
By being peevish ? I tell thee what , Antonio 
I love thee , and it is my love that speaks 
There are a sort of men whose visages 
Do cream and mantle like a standing pond ,
And do a wilful stillness entertain ,
With purpose to be dress'd in an opinion 
Of wisdom , gravity , profound conceit ;
As who should say , 'I am Sir Oracle ,
And when I ope my lips let no dog bark !' 
O , my Antonio , I do know of these ,
That therefore only are reputed wise 
For saying nothing ; when , I am very sure ,
If they should speak , would almost damn those ears 
Which , hearing them , would call their brothers fools .
I'll tell thee more of this another time :
But fish not , with this melancholy bait ,
For this fool-gudgeon , this opinion .
Come , good Lorenzo . Fare ye well awhile :
I'll end my exhortation after dinner .

Well , we will leave you then till dinner-time .
I must be one of these same dumb-wise men ,
For Gratiano never lets me speak .

Well , keep me company but two years moe ,
Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue .

Farewell : I'll grow a talker for this gear .

Thanks , i' faith ; for silence is only commendable 
In a neat's tongue dried and a maid not vendible .


Is that anything now ?

Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing , more than any man in all Venice . His reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chaff : you shall seek all day ere you find them , and , when you have them , they are not worth the search .

Well , tell me now , what lady is the same 
To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage ,
That you to-day promis'd to tell me of ?

'Tis not unknown to you , Antonio ,
How much I have disabled mine estate ,
By something showing a more swelling port 
Than my faint means would grant continuance :
Nor do I now make moan to be abridg'd 
From such a noble rate ; but my chief care 
Is , to come fairly off from the great debts 
Wherein my time , something too prodigal ,
Hath left me gag'd . To you , Antonio ,
I owe the most , in money and in love ;
And from your love I have a warranty 
To unburthen all my plots and purposes 
How to get clear of all the debts I owe .

I pray you , good Bassanio , let me know it ;
And if it stand , as you yourself still do ,
Within the eye of honour , be assur'd ,
My purse , my person , my extremest means ,
Lie all unlock'd to your occasions .

In my school-days , when I had lost one shaft ,
I shot his fellow of the self-same flight 
The self-same way with more advised watch ,
To find the other forth , and by adventuring both ,
I oft found both . I urge this childhood proof ,
Because what follows is pure innocence .
I owe you much , and , like a wilful youth ,
That which I owe is lost ; but if you please 
To shoot another arrow that self way 
Which you did shoot the first , I do not doubt ,
As I will watch the aim , or to find both ,
Or bring your latter hazard back again ,
And thankfully rest debtor for the first .

You know me well , and herein spend but time 
To wind about my love with circumstance ;
And out of doubt you do me now more wrong 
In making question of my uttermost 
Than if you had made waste of all I have :
Then do but say to me what I should do 
That in your knowledge may by me be done ,
And I am prest unto it : therefore speak .

In Belmont is a lady richly left ,
And she is fair , and , fairer than that word ,
Of wondrous virtues : sometimes from her eyes 
I did receive fair speechless messages :
Her name is Portia ; nothing undervalu'd 
To Cato's daughter , Brutus' Portia :
Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth ,
For the four winds blow in from every coast 
Renowned suitors ; and her sunny locks 
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece ;
Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchos' strond ,
And many Jasons come in quest of her .
O my Antonio ! had I but the means 
To hold a rival place with one of them ,
I have a mind presages me such thrift ,
That I should questionless be fortunate .

Thou knowest that all my fortunes are at sea ;
Neither have I money , nor commodity 
To raise a present sum : therefore go forth ;
Try what my credit can in Venice do :
That shall be rack'd , even to the uttermost ,
To furnish thee to Belmont , to fair Portia .
Go , presently inquire , and so will I ,
Where money is , and I no question make 
To have it of my trust or for my sake .


By my troth , Nerissa , my little body is aweary of this great world .

You would be , sweet madam , if your miseries were in the same abundance as your good fortunes are : and yet , for aught I see , they are as sick that surfeit with too much as they that starve with nothing . It is no mean happiness therefore , to be seated in the mean : superfluity comes sooner by white hairs , but competency lives longer .

Good sentences and well pronounced .

They would be better if well followed .

If to do were as easy as to know what were good to do , chapels had been churches , and poor men's cottages princes' palaces . It is a good divine that follows his own instructions : I can easier teach twenty what were good to be done , than be one of the twenty to follow mine own teaching . The brain may devise laws for the blood , but a hot temper leaps o'er a cold decree : such a hare is madness the youth , to skip o'er the meshes of good counsel the cripple . But this reasoning is not in the fashion to choose me a husband . O me , the word 'choose !' I may neither choose whom I would nor refuse whom I dislike ; so is the will of a living daughter curbed by the will of a dead father . Is it not hard , Nerissa , that I cannot choose one nor refuse none ?

Your father was ever virtuous , and holy men at their death have good inspirations ; therefore , the lottery that he hath devised in these three chests of gold , silver , and lead , whereof who chooses his meaning chooses you , will , no doubt , never be chosen by any rightly but one who you shall rightly love . But what warmth is there in your affection towards any of these princely suitors that are already come ?

I pray thee , over-name them , and as thou namest them , I will describe them ; and , according to my description , level at my affection .

First , there is the Neapolitan prince .

Ay , that's a colt indeed , for he doth nothing but talk of his horse ; and he makes it a great appropriation to his own good parts that he can shoe him himself . I am much afeard my lady his mother played false with a smith .

Then is there the County Palatine .

He doth nothing but frown , as who should say , 'An you will not have me , choose .' He hears merry tales , and smiles not : I fear he will prove the weeping philosopher when he grows old , being so full of unmannerly sadness in his youth . I had rather be married to a death's-head with a bone in his mouth than to either of these . God defend me from these two !

How say you by the French lord , Monsieur Le Bon ?

God made him , and therefore let him pass for a man . In truth , I know it is a sin to be a mocker ; but , he ! why , he hath a horse better than the Neapolitan's , a better bad habit of frowning than the Count Palatine ; he is every man in no man ; if a throstle sing , he falls straight a-capering ; he will fence with his own shadow : if I should marry him , I should marry twenty husbands . If he would despise me , I would forgive him , for if he love me to madness , I shall never requite him .

What say you , then , to Falconbridge , the young baron of England ?

You know I say nothing to him , for he understands not me , nor I him : he hath neither Latin , French , nor Italian ; and you will come into the court and swear that I have a poor pennyworth in the English . He is a proper man's picture , but , alas ! who can converse with a dumb-show ? How oddly he is suited ! I think he bought his doublet in Italy , his round hose in France , his bonnet in Germany , and his behaviour every where .

What think you of the Scottish lord , his neighbour ?

That he hath a neighbourly charity in him , for he borrowed a box of the ear of the Englishman , and swore he would pay him again when he was able : I think the Frenchman became his surety and sealed under for another .

How like you the young German , the Duke of Saxony's nephew ?

Very vilely in the morning , when he is sober , and most vilely in the afternoon , when he is drunk : when he is best , he is a little worse than a man , and when he is worst , he is little better than a beast . An the worst fall that ever fell , I hope I shall make shift to go without him .

If he should offer to choose , and choose the right casket , you should refuse to perform your father's will , if you should refuse to accept him .

Therefore , for fear of the worst , I pray thee , set a deep glass of Rhenish wine on the contrary casket , for , if the devil be within and that temptation without , I know he will choose it . I will do anything , Nerissa , ere I will be married to a sponge .

You need not fear , lady , the having any of these lords : they have acquainted me with their determinations ; which is , indeed , to return to their home and to trouble you with no more suit , unless you may be won by some other sort than your father's imposition depending on the caskets .

If I live to be as old as Sibylla , I will die as chaste as Diana , unless I be obtained by the manner of my father's will . I am glad this parcel of wooers are so reasonable , for there is not one among them but I dote on his very absence , and I pray God grant them a fair departure .

Do you not remember , lady , in your father's time , a Venetian , a scholar and a soldier , that came hither in the company of the Marquis of Montferrat ?

Yes , yes : it was Bassanio ; as I think , he was so called .

True , madam : he , of all the men that ever my foolish eyes looked upon , was the best deserving a fair lady .

I remember him well , and I remember him worthy of thy praise .

How now ! what news ?

The four strangers seek for you , madam , to take their leave ; and there is a forerunner come from a fifth , the Prince of Morocco , who brings word the prince his master will be here to-night .

If I could bid the fifth welcome with so good heart as I can bid the other four farewell , I should be glad of his approach : if he have the condition of a saint and the complexion of a devil , I had rather he should shrive me than wive me . Come , Nerissa . Sirrah , go before .
Whiles we shut the gate upon one wooer , another knocks at the door .


Three thousand ducats ; well ?

Ay , sir , for three months .

For three months ; well ?

For the which , as I told you , Antonio shall be bound .

Antonio shall become bound ; well ?

May you stead me ? Will you pleasure me ? Shall I know your answer ?

Three thousand ducats , for three months , and Antonio bound .

Your answer to that .

Antonio is a good man .

Have you heard any imputation to the contrary ?

Ho , no , no , no , no : my meaning in saying he is a good man is to have you understand me that he is sufficient . Yet his means are in supposition : he hath an argosy bound to Tripolis , another to the Indies ; I understand moreover upon the Rialto , he hath a third at Mexico , a fourth for England , and other ventures he hath , squandered abroad . But ships are but boards , sailors but men : there be land-rats and water-rats , land-thieves , and water-thieves ,I mean pirates ,and then there is the peril of waters , winds , and rocks . The man is , notwithstanding , sufficient . Three thousand ducats ; I think , I may take his bond .

Be assured you may .

I will be assured I may ; and , that I may be assured , I will bethink me . May I speak with Antonio ?

If it please you to dine with us .

Yes , to smell pork : to eat of the habitation which your prophet the Nazarite conjured the devil into . I will buy with you , sell with you , talk with you , walk with you , and so following ; but I will not eat with you , drink with you , nor pray with you . What news on the Rialto ? Who is he comes here ?


This is Signior Antonio .

How like a fawning publican he looks !
I hate him for he is a Christian ;
But more for that in low simplicity 
He lends out money gratis , and brings down 
The rate of usance here with us in Venice .
If I can catch him once upon the hip ,
I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him .
He hates our sacred nation , and he rails ,
Even there where merchants most do congregate ,
On me , my bargains , and my well-won thrift ,
Which he calls interest . Cursed be my tribe ,
If I forgive him !

Shylock , do you hear ?

I am debating of my present store ,
And , by the near guess of my memory ,
I cannot instantly raise up the gross 
Of full three thousand ducats . What of that ?
Tubal , a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe ,
Will furnish me . But soft ! how many months 
Do you desire ?

Rest you fair , good signior ;
Your worship was the last man in our mouths .

Shylock , albeit I neither lend nor borrow 
By taking nor by giving of excess ,
Yet , to supply the ripe wants of my friend ,
I'll break a custom .

Is he yet possess'd 
How much ye would ?

Ay , ay , three thousand ducats .

And for three months .

I had forgot ; three months ; you told me so .
Well then , your bond ; and let me see . But hear you ;
Methought you said you neither lend nor borrow 
Upon advantage .

I do never use it .

When Jacob graz'd his uncle Laban's sheep ,
This Jacob from our holy Abram was ,
As his wise mother wrought in his behalf ,
The third possessor : ay , he was the third ,

And what of him ? did he take interest ?

No ; not take interest ; not , as you would say ,
Directly interest : mark what Jacob did .
When Laban and himself were compromis'd ,
That all the eanlings that were streak'd and pied 
Should fall as Jacob's hire , the ewes , being rank ,
In end of autumn turned to the rams ;
And , when the work of generation was 
Between these woolly breeders in the act ,
The skilful shepherd peel'd me certain wands ,
And , in the doing of the deed of kind ,
He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes ,
Who , then conceiving , did in eaning time 
Fall parti-colour'd lambs , and those were Jacob's .
This was a way to thrive , and he was blest :
And thrift is blessing , if men steal it not .

This was a venture , sir , that Jacob serv'd for ;
A thing not in his power to bring to pass ,
But sway'd and fashion'd by the hand of heaven .
Was this inserted to make interest good ?
Or is your gold and silver ewes and rams ?

I cannot tell ; I make it breed as fast : But note me , signior .

Mark you this , Bassanio ,
The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose .
An evil soul , producing holy witness ,
Is like a villain with a smiling cheek ,
A goodly apple rotten at the heart .
O , what a goodly outside falsehood hath !

Three thousand ducats ; 'tis a good round sum .
Three months from twelve , then let me see the rate .

Well , Shylock , shall we be beholding to you ?

Signior Antonio , many a time and oft 
In the Rialto you have rated me 
About my moneys and my usances :
Still have I borne it with a patient shrug ,
For sufferance is the badge of all our tribe .
You call me misbeliever , cut-throat dog ,
And spet upon my Jewish gaberdine ,
And all for use of that which is mine own .
Well then , it now appears you need my help :
Go to then ; you come to me , and you say ,
'Shylock , we would have moneys :' you say so ;
You , that did void your rheum upon my beard ,
And foot me as you spurn a stranger cur 
Over your threshold : moneys is your suit .
What should I say to you ? Should I not say ,
'Hath a dog money ? Is it possible 
A cur can lend three thousand ducats ?' or 
Shall I bend low , and in a bondman's key ,
With bated breath , and whispering humbleness ,
Say this :
'Fair sir , you spet on me on Wednesday last ;
You spurn'd me such a day ; another time 
You call'd me dog ; and for these courtesies 
I'll lend you thus much moneys ?' 

I am as like to call thee so again ,
To spet on thee again , to spurn thee too .
If thou wilt lend this money , lend it not 
As to thy friends ,for when did friendship take 
A breed for barren metal of his friend ?
But lend it rather to thine enemy ;
Who if he break , thou mayst with better face 
Exact the penalty .

Why , look you , how you storm !
I would be friends with you , and have your love ,
Forget the shames that you have stain'd me with ,
Supply your present wants , and take no doit 
Of usance for my moneys , and you'll not hear me :
This is kind I offer .

This were kindness .

This kindness will I show .
Go with me to a notary , seal me there 
Your single bond ; and , in a merry sport ,
If you repay me not on such a day ,
In such a place , such sum or sums as are 
Express'd in the condition , let the forfeit 
Be nominated for an equal pound 
Of your fair flesh , to be cut off and taken 
In what part of your body pleaseth me .

Content , i' faith : I'll seal to such a bond ,
And say there is much kindness in the Jew .

You shall not seal to such a bond for me :
I'll rather dwell in my necessity .

Why , fear not , man ; I will not forfeit it :
Within these two months , that's a month before 
This bond expires , I do expect return 
Of thrice three times the value of this bond .

O father Abram ! what these Christians are ,
Whose own hard dealing teaches them suspect 
The thoughts of others . Pray you , tell me this ;
If he should break his day , what should I gain 
By the exaction of the forfeiture ?
A pound of man's flesh , taken from a man ,
Is not so estimable , profitable neither ,
As flesh of muttons , beefs , or goats . I say ,
To buy his favour , I extend this friendship :
If he will take it , so ; if not , adieu ;
And , for my love , I pray you wrong me not .

Yes , Shylock , I will seal unto this bond .

Then meet me forthwith at the notary's ;
Give him direction for this merry bond ,
And I will go and purse the ducats straight ,
See to my house , left in the fearful guard 
Of an unthrifty knave , and presently 
I will be with you .

Hie thee , gentle Jew .

This Hebrew will turn Christian : he grows kind .

I like not fair terms and a villain's mind .

Come on : in this there can be no dismay ;
My ships come home a month before the day .


Mislike me not for my complexion ,
The shadow'd livery of the burnish'd sun ,
To whom I am a neighbour and near bred .
Bring me the fairest creature northward born ,
Where Ph bus' fire scarce thaws the icicles ,
And let us make incision for your love ,
To prove whose blood is reddest , his or mine .
I tell thee , lady , this aspect of mine 
Hath fear'd the valiant : by my love , I swear 
The best regarded virgins of our clime 
Have lov'd it too : I would not change this hue ,
Except to steal your thoughts , my gentle queen .

In terms of choice I am not solely led 
By nice direction of a maiden's eyes ;
Besides , the lottery of my destiny 
Bars me the right of voluntary choosing :
But if my father had not scanted me 
And hedg'd me by his wit , to yield myself 
His wife who wins me by that means I told you ,
Yourself , renowned prince , then stood as fair 
As any comer I have look'd on yet 
For my affection .

Even for that I thank you :
Therefore , I pray you , lead me to the caskets 
To try my fortune . By this scimitar ,
That slew the Sophy , and a Persian prince 
That won three fields of Sultan Solyman ,
I would outstare the sternest eyes that look ,
Outbrave the heart most daring on the earth ,
Pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear ,
Yea , mock the lion when he roars for prey ,
To win thee , lady . But , alas the while !
If Hercules and Lichas play at dice 
Which is the better man , the greater throw 
May turn by fortune from the weaker hand :
So is Alcides beaten by his page ;
And so may I , blind fortune leading me ,
Miss that which one unworthier may attain ,
And die with grieving .

You must take your chance ;
And either not attempt to choose at all ,
Or swear before you choose , if you choose wrong ,
Never to speak to lady afterward 
In way of marriage : therefore be advis'd .

Nor will not : come , bring me unto my chance .

First , forward to the temple : after dinner 
Your hazard shall be made .

Good fortune then !
To make me blest or cursed'st among men !


Certainly my conscience will serve me to run from this Jew my master . The fiend is at mine elbow , and tempts me , saying to me , 'Gobbo , Launcelot Gobbo , good Launcelot ,' or 'good Gobbo ,' or 'good Launcelot Gobbo , use your legs , take the start , run away .' My conscience says , 'No ; take heed , honest Launcelot ; take heed , honest Gobbo ;' or , as aforesaid , 'honest Launcelot Gobbo ; do not run ; scorn running with thy heels .' Well , the most courageous fiend bids me pack : 'Via !' says the fiend ; 'away !' says the fiend ; 'for the heavens , rouse up a brave mind ,' says the fiend , 'and run .' Well , my conscience , hanging about the neck of my heart , says very wisely to me , 'My honest friend Launcelot , being an honest man's son ,' or rather an honest woman's son ;for , indeed , my father did something smack , something grow to , he had a kind of taste ;well , my conscience says , 'Launcelot , budge not .' 'Budge ,' says the fiend . 'Budge not ,' says my conscience . 'Conscience ,' say I , 'you counsel well ;' 'fiend ,' say I , 'you counsel well :' to be ruled by my conscience , I should stay with the Jew my master , who , God bless the mark ! is a kind of devil ; and , to run away from the Jew , I should be ruled by the fiend , who , saving your reverence , is the devil himself . Certainly , the Jew is the very devil incarnal ; and , in my conscience , my conscience is but a kind of hard conscience , to offer to counsel me to stay with the Jew . The fiend gives the more friendly counsel : I will run , fiend ; my heels are at your commandment ; I will run .


Master young man , you ; I pray you , which is the way to Master Jew's ?

O heavens ! this is my truebegotten father , who , being more than sandblind , high-gravel blind , knows me not : I will try confusions with him .

Master young gentleman , I pray you , which is the way to Master Jew's ?

Turn up on your right hand at the next turning , but , at the next turning of all , on your left ; marry , at the very next turning , turn of no hand , but turn down indirectly to the Jew's house .

By God's sonties , 'twill be a hard way to hit . Can you tell me whether one Launcelot , that dwells with him , dwell with him or no ?

Talk you of young Master Launcelot ?

Mark me now ; now will I raise the waters . Talk you of young Master Launcelot ?

No master , sir , but a poor man's son : his father , though I say it , is an honest , exceeding poor man , and , God be thanked , well to live .

Well , let his father be what a' will , we talk of young Master Launcelot .

Your worship's friend , and Launcelot , sir .

But I pray you , ergo , old man , ergo , I beseech you , talk you of young Master Launcelot ?

Of Launcelot , an't please your mastership .

Ergo , Master Launcelot . Talk not of Master Launcelot , father ; for the young gentleman ,according to Fates and Destinies and such odd sayings , the Sisters Three and such branches of learning ,is , indeed , deceased ; or , as you would say in plain terms , gone to heaven .

Marry , God forbid ! the boy was the very staff of my age , my very prop .

Do I look like a cudgel or a hovel-post , a staff or a prop ? Do you know me , father ?

Alack the day ! I know you not , young gentleman : but I pray you , tell me , is my boy ,God rest his soul !alive or dead ?

Do you not know me , father ?

Alack , sir , I am sand-blind ; I know you not .

Nay , indeed , if you had your eyes , you might fail of the knowing me : it is a wise father that knows his own child . Well , old man , I will tell you news of your son . Give me your blessing ; truth will come to light ; murder cannot be hid long ; a man's son may , but , in the end , truth will out .

Pray you , sir , stand up . I am sure you are not Launcelot , my boy .

Pray you , let's have no more fooling about it , but give me your blessing : I am Launcelot , your boy that was , your son that is , your child that shall be .

I cannot think you are my son .

I know not what I shall think of that ; but I am Launcelot , the Jew's man , and I am sure Margery your wife is my mother .

Her name is Margery , indeed : I'll be sworn , if thou be Launcelot , thou art mine own flesh and blood . Lord worshipped might he be ! what a beard hast thou got ! thou hast got more hair on thy chin than Dobbin my thill-horse has on his tail .

It should seem then that Dobbin's tail grows backward : I am sure he had more hair on his tail than I have on my face , when I last saw him .

Lord ! how art thou changed . How dost thou and thy master agree ? I have brought him a present . How 'gree you now ?

Well , well : but , for mine own part , as I have set up my rest to run away , so I will not rest till I have run some ground . My master's a very Jew : give him a present ! give him a halter : I am farnished in his service ; you may tell every finger I have with my ribs . Father , I am glad you are come : give me your present to one Master Bassanio , who , indeed , gives rare new liveries . If I serve not him , I will run as far as God has any ground . O rare fortune ! here comes the man : to him , father ; for I am a Jew , if I serve the Jew any longer .


You may do so ; but let it be so hasted that supper be ready at the very furthest by five of the clock . See these letters delivered ; put the liveries to making ; and desire Gratiano to come anon to my lodging .


To him , father .

God bless your worship !

Gramercy ! wouldst thou aught with me ?

Here's my son , sir , a poor boy ,

Not a poor boy , sir , but the rich Jew's man ; that would , sir ,as my father shall specify ,

He hath a great infection , sir , as one would say , to serve 

Indeed , the short and the long is , I serve the Jew , and have a desire , as my father shall specify ,

His master and he , saving your worship's reverence , are scarce cater-cousins ,

To be brief , the very truth is that the Jew having done me wrong , doth cause me ,as my father , being , I hope , an old man , shall frutify unto you ,

I have here a dish of doves that I would bestow upon your worship , and my suit is ,

In very brief , the suit is impertinent to myself , as your worship shall know by this honest old man ; and , though I say it , though old man , yet poor man , my father .

One speak for both . What would you ?

Serve you , sir .

That is the very defect of the matter , sir .

I know thee well ; thou hast obtain'd thy suit :
Shylock thy master spoke with me this day ,
And hath preferr'd thee , if it be preferment 
To leave a rich Jew's service , to become 
The follower of so poor a gentleman .

The old proverb is very well parted between my master Shylock and you , sir : you have the grace of God , sir , and he hath enough .

Thou speak'st it well . Go , father , with thy son .
Take leave of thy old master , and inquire 
My lodging out .

Give him a livery 
More guarded than his fellows' : see it done .

Father , in . I cannot get a service , no ; I have ne'er a tongue in my head . Well ,

if any man in Italy have a fairer table which doth offer to swear upon a book , I shall have good fortune . Go to ; here's a simple line of life : here's a small trifle of wives : alas ! fifteen wives is nothing : a 'leven widows and nine maids is a simple coming-in for one man ; and then to 'scape drowning thrice , and to be in peril of my life with the edge of a feather-bed ; here are simple 'scapes . Well , if Fortune be a woman , she's a good wench for this gear . Father , come ; I'll take my leave of the Jew in the twinkling of an eye .


I pray thee , good Leonardo , think on this :
These things being bought , and orderly bestow'd ,
Return in haste , for I do feast to-night 
My best-esteem'd acquaintance : hie thee , go .

My best endeavours shall be done herein .


Where is your master ?

Yonder , sir , he walks .


Signior Bassanio !

Gratiano !

I have a suit to you .

You have obtain'd it .

You must not deny me : I must go with you to Belmont .

Why , then you must . But hear thee , Gratiano ;
Thou art too wild , too rude and bold of voice ;
Parts that become thee happily enough ,
And in such eyes as ours appear not faults ;
But where thou art not known , why , there they show 
Something too liberal . Pray thee , take pain 
To allay with some cold drops of modesty 
Thy skipping spirit , lest , through thy wild behaviour ,
I be misconstru'd in the place I go to ,
And lose my hopes .

Signior Bassanio , hear me :
If I do not put on a sober habit ,
Talk with respect , and swear but now and then ,
Wear prayer-books in my pocket , look demurely ,
Nay more , while grace is saying , hood mine eyes 
Thus with my hat , and sigh , and say 'amen ;' 
Use all the observance of civility ,
Like one well studied in a sad ostent 
To please his grandam , never trust me more .

Well , we shall see your bearing .

Nay , but I bar to-night ; you shall not gauge me 
By what we do to-night .

No , that were pity :
I would entreat you rather to put on 
Your boldest suit of mirth , for we have friends 
That purpose merriment . But fare you well :
I have some business .

And I must to Lorenzo and the rest ;
But we will visit you at supper-time .


I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so :
Our house is hell , and thou , a merry devil ,
Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness .
But fare thee well ; there is a ducat for thee :
And , Launcelot , soon at supper shalt thou see 
Lorenzo , who is thy new master's guest :
Give him this letter ; do it secretly ;
And so farewell : I would not have my father 
See me in talk with thee .

Adieu ! tears exhibit my tongue . Most beautiful pagan , most sweet Jew ! If a Christian did not play the knave and get thee , I am much deceived . But , adieu ! these foolish drops do somewhat drown my manly spirit : adieu !

Farewell , good Launcelot .

Alack , what heinous sin is it in me 
To be asham'd to be my father's child !
But though I am a daughter to his blood ,
I am not to his manners . O Lorenzo !
If thou keep promise , I shall end this strife ,
Become a Christian , and thy loving wife .


Nay , we will slink away in supper-time ,
Disguise us at my lodging , and return 
All in an hour .

We have not made good preparation .

We have not spoke us yet of torch-bearers .

'Tis vile , unless it may be quaintly order'd ,
And better , in my mind , not undertook .

'Tis now but four o'clock : we have two hours 
To furnish us .

Friend Launcelot , what's the news ?

An it shall please you to break up this , it shall seem to signify .

I know the hand : in faith , 'tis a fair hand ;
And whiter than the paper it writ on 
Is the fair hand that writ .

Love news , in faith .

By your leave , sir .

Whither goest thou ?

Marry , sir , to bid my old master , the Jew , to sup to-night with my new master , the Christian .

Hold here , take this : tell gentle Jessica 
I will not fail her ; speak it privately .
Go , gentlemen ,

Will you prepare you for this masque to-night ?
I am provided of a torch-bearer .

Ay , marry , I'll be gone about it straight .

And so will I .

Meet me and Gratiano 
At Gratiano's lodging some hour hence .

'Tis good we do so .


Was not that letter from fair Jessica ?

I must needs tell thee all . She hath directed 
How I shall take her from her father's house ;
What gold and jewels she is furnish'd with ;
What page's suit she hath in readiness .
If e'er the Jew her father come to heaven ,
It will be for his gentle daughter's sake ;
And never dare misfortune cross her foot ,
Unless she do it under this excuse ,
That she is issue to a faithless Jew .
Come , go with me : peruse this as thou goest .
Fair Jessica shall be my torch-bearer .


Well , thou shalt see , thy eyes shall be thy judge ,
The difference of old Shylock and Bassanio :
What , Jessical thou shalt not gormandize ,
As thou hast done with me ;What , Jessical 
And sleep and snore , and rend apparel out 
Why , Jessica , I say !

Why , Jessica !

Who bids thee call ? I do not bid thee call .

Your worship was wont to tell me that 
I could do nothing without bidding .


Call you ? What is your will ?

I am bid forth to supper , Jessica :
There are my keys . But wherefore should I go ?
I am not bid for love ; they flatter me :
But yet I'll go in hate , to feed upon 
The prodigal Christian . Jessica , my girl ,
Look to my house . I am right loath to go :
There is some ill a-brewing towards my rest ,
For I did dream of money-bags to-night .

I beseech you , sir , go : my young master doth expect your reproach .

So do I his .

And they have conspired together : I will not say you shall see a masque ; but if you do , then it was not for nothing that my nose fell a-bleeding on Black-Monday last , at six o'clock i' the morning , falling out that year on Ash-Wednesday was four year in the afternoon .

What ! are there masques ? Hear you me , Jessica :
Lock up my doors ; and when you hear the drum ,
And the vile squealing of the wry-neck'd fife ,
Clamber not you up to the casements then ,
Nor thrust your head into the public street 
To gaze on Christian fools with varnish'd faces ,
But stop my house's ears , I mean my casements ;
Let not the sound of shallow foppery enter 
My sober house . By Jacob's staff I swear 
I have no mind of feasting forth to-night ;
But I will go . Go you before me , sirrah ;
Say I will come .

I will go before , air . Mistress , look out at window , for all this ;

There will come a Christian by ,
Will be worth a Jewess' eye .

What says that fool of Hagar's offspring , ha ?

His words were , 'Farewell , mistress ;' nothing else .

The patch is kind enough , but a huge feeder ;
Snail-slow in profit , and he sleeps by day 
More than the wild cat : drones hive not with me ;
Therefore I part with him , and part with him 
To one that I would have him help to waste 
His borrow'd purse . Well , Jessica , go in :
Perhaps I will return immediately :
Do as I bid you ; shut doors after you :
'Fast bind , fast find ,' 
A proverb never stale in thrifty mind .


Farewell ; and if my fortune be not crost ,
I have a father , you a daughter , lost .


This is the penthouse under which Lorenzo 
Desir'd us to make stand .

His hour is almost past .

And it is marvel he out-dwells his hour ,
For lovers ever run before the clock .

O ! ten times faster Venus' pigeons fly 
To seal love's bonds new-made , than they are wont 
To keep obliged faith unforfeited !

That ever holds : who riseth from a feast 
With that keen appetite that he sits down ?
Where is the horse that doth untread again 
His tedious measures with the unbated fire 
That he did pace them first ? All things that are ,
Are with more spirit chased than enjoy'd .
How like a younker or a prodigal 
The scarfed bark puts from her native bay ,
Hugg'd and embraced by the strumpet wind !
How like the prodigal doth she return ,
With over-weather'd ribs and ragged sails ,
Lean , rent , and beggar'd by the strumpet wind !

Here comes Lorenzo : more of this hereafter .


Sweet friends , your patience for my long abode ;
Not I , but my affairs , have made you wait :
When you shall please to play the thieves for wives ,
I'll watch as long for you then . Approach ;
Here dwells my father Jew . Ho ! who's within ?


Who are you ? Tell me , for more certainty ,
Albeit I'll swear that I do know your tongue .

Lorenzo , and thy love .

Lorenzo , certain ; and my love indeed ,
For whom love I so much ? And now who knows 
But you , Lorenzo , whether I am yours ?

Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art .

Here , catch this casket ; it is worth the pains .
I am glad 'tis night , you do not look on me ,
For I am much asham'd of my exchange ;
But love is blind , and lovers cannot see 
The pretty follies that themselves commit ;
For if they could , Cupid himself would blush 
To see me thus transformed to a boy .

Descend , for you must be my torch-bearer .

What ! must I hold a candle to my shames ?
They in themselves , good sooth , are too-too light .
Why , 'tis an office of discovery , love ,
And I should be obscur'd .

So are you , sweet ,
Even in the lovely garnish of a boy .
But come at once ;
For the close night doth play the runaway ,
And we are stay'd for at Bassanio's feast .

I will make fast the doors , and gild myself 
With some more ducats , and be with you straight .


Now , by my hood , a Gentile , and no Jew .

Beshrew me , but I love her heartily ;
For she is wise , if I can judge of her ,
And fair she is , if that mine eyes be true ,
And true she is , as she hath prov'd herself ;
And therefore , like herself , wise , fair , and true ,
Shall she be placed in my constant soul .


What , art thou come ? On , gentlemen ; away !
Our masquing mates by this time for us stay .


Who's there ?

Signior Antonio !

Fie , fie , Gratiano ! where are all the rest ?
'Tis nine o'clock ; our friends all stay for you .
No masque to-night : the wind is come about ;
Bassanio presently will go aboard :
I have sent twenty out to seek for you .

I am glad on't : I desire no more delight 
Than to be under sail and gone to-night .


Go , draw aside the curtains , and discover 
The several caskets to this noble prince .
Now make your choice .

The first , of gold , which this inscription bears :
Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire .
The second , silver , which this promise carries :
Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves .
This third , dull lead , with warning all as blunt :
Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath .
How shall I know if I do choose the right ?

The one of them contains my picture , prince :
If you choose that , then I am yours withal .

Some god direct my judgment ! Let me see :
I will survey the inscriptions back again :
What says this leaden casket ?
Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath .
Must give : For what ? for lead ? hazard for lead ?
This casket threatens . Men that hazard all 
Do it in hope of fair advantages :
A golden mind stoops not to shows of dross ;
I'll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead .
What says the silver with her virgin hue ?
Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves .
As much as he deserves ! Pause there , Morocco ,
And weigh thy value with an even hand .
If thou be'st rated by thy estimation ,
Thou dost deserve enough ; and yet enough 
May not extend so far as to the lady :
And yet to be afeard of my deserving 
Were but a weak disabling of myself .
As much as I deserve ! Why , that's the lady :
I do in birth deserve her , and in fortunes ,
In graces , and in qualities of breeding ;
But more than these , in love I do deserve .
What if I stray'd no further , but chose here ?
Let's see once more this saying grav'd in gold :
Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire .
Why , that's the lady : all the world desires her ;
From the four corners of the earth they come ,
To kiss this shrine , this mortal-breathing saint :
The Hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds 
Of wide Arabia are as throughfares now 
For princes to come view fair Portia :
The watery kingdom , whose ambitious head 
Spits in the face of heaven , is no bar 
To stop the foreign spirits , but they come ,
As o'er a brook , to see fair Portia .
One of these three contains her heavenly picture .
Is't like that lead contains her ? 'Twere damnation 
To think so base a thought : it were too gross 
To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave .
Or shall I think in silver she's immur'd ,
Being ten times undervalu'd to tried gold ?
O sinful thought ! Never so rich a gem 
Was set in worse than gold . They have in England 
A coin that bears the figure of an angel 
Stamped in gold , but that's insculp'd upon ;
But here an angel in a golden bed 
Lies all within . Deliver me the key :
Here do I choose , and thrive I as I may !

There , take it , prince ; and if my form lie there ,
Then I am yours .


O hell ! what have we here ?
A carrion Death , within whose empty eye 
There is a written scroll . I'll read the writing .

All that glisters is not gold ;
Often have you heard that told :
Many a man his life hath sold 
But my outside to behold :
Gilded tombs do worms infold .
Had you been as wise as bold ,
Young in limbs , in judgment old ,
Your answer had not been inscroll'd :
Fare you well ; your suit is cold .

Cold , indeed ; and labour lost :
Then , farewell , heat , and welcome , frost !
Portia , adieu . I have too griev'd a heart 
To take a tedious leave : thus losers part .


A gentle riddance . Draw the curtains : go .
Let all of his complexion choose me so .


Why , man , I saw Bassanio under sail :
With him is Gratiano gone along ;
And in their ship I'm sure Lorenzo is not .

The villain Jew with outcries rais'd the duke ,
Who went with him to search Bassanio's ship .

He came too late , the ship was under sail :
But there the duke was given to understand 
That in a gondola were seen together 
Lorenzo and his amorous Jessica .
Besides , Antonio certified the duke 
They were not with Bassanio in his ship .

I never heard a passion so confus'd ,
So strange , outrageous , and so variable ,
As the dog Jew did utter in the streets :
'My daughter ! O my ducats ! O my daughter !
Fled with a Christian ! O my Christian ducats !
Justice ! the law ! my ducats , and my daughter !
A sealed bag , two sealed bags of ducats ,
Of double ducats , stol'n from me by my daughter !
And jewels ! two stones , two rich and precious stones ,
Stol'n by my daughter ! Justice ! find the girl !
She hath the stones upon her , and the ducats .' 

Why , all the boys in Venice follow him ,
Crying , his stones , his daughter , and his ducats .

Let good Antonio look he keep his day ,
Or he shall pay for this .

Marry , well remember'd .
I reason'd with a Frenchman yesterday ,
Who told me ,in the narrow seas that part 
The French and English ,there miscarried 
A vessel of our country richly fraught .
I thought upon Antonio when he told me ,
And wish'd in silence that it were not his .

You were best to tell Antonio what you hear ;
Yet do not suddenly , for it may grieve him .

A kinder gentleman treads not the earth .
I saw Bassanio and Antonio part :
Bassanio told him he would make some speed 
Of his return : he answer'd 'Do not so ;
Slubber not business for my sake , Bassanio ,
But stay the very riping of the time ;
And for the Jew's bond which he hath of me ,
Let it not enter in your mind of love :
Be merry , and employ your chiefest thoughts 
To courtship and such fair ostents of love 
As shall conveniently become you there :' 
And even there , his eye being big with tears ,
Turning his face , he put his hand behind him ,
And with affection wondrous sensible 
He wrung Bassanio's hand ; and so they parted .

I think he only loves the world for him .
I pray thee , let us go and find him out ,
And quicken his embraced heaviness 
With some delight or other .

Do we so .


Quick , quick , I pray thee ; draw the curtain straight :
The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oath ,
And comes to his election presently .


Behold , there stands the caskets , noble prince :
If you choose that wherein I am contain'd ,
Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemniz'd ;
But if you fail , without more speech , my lord ,
You must be gone from hence immediately .

I am enjoin'd by oath to observe three things :
First , never to unfold to any one 
Which casket 'twas I chose ; next , if I fail 
Of the right casket , never in my life 
To woo a maid in way of marriage ;
Lastly ,
If I do fail in fortune of my choice ,
Immediately to leave you and be gone .

To these injunctions every one doth swear 
That comes to hazard for my worthless self .

And so have I address'd me . Fortune now 
To my heart's hope ! Gold , silver , and base lead .
Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath :
You shall look fairer , ere I give or hazard .
What says the golden chest ? ha ! let me see :
Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire .
What many men desire ! that 'many' may be meant 
By the fool multitude , that choose by show ,
Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach ;
Which pries not to the interior , but , like the martlet ,
Builds in the weather on the outward wall ,
Even in the force and road of casualty .
I will not choose what many men desire ,
Because I will not jump with common spirits 
And rank me with the barbarous multitude .
Why , then to thee , thou silver treasure-house ;
Tell me once more what title thou dost bear :
Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves .
And well said too ; for who shall go about 
To cozen fortune and be honourable 
Without the stamp of merit ? Let none presume 
To wear an undeserved dignity .
O ! that estates , degrees , and offices 
Were not deriv'd corruptly , and that clear honour 
Were purchas'd by the merit of the wearer .
How many then should cover that stand bare ;
How many be commanded that command ;
How much low peasantry would then be glean'd 
From the true seed of honour ; and how much honour 
Pick'd from the chaff and ruin of the times 
To be new varnish'd ! Well , but to my choice :
Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves .
I will assume desert . Give me a key for this ,
And instantly unlock my fortunes here .


Too long a pause for that which you find there .

What's here ? the portrait of a blinking idiot ,
Presenting me a schedule ! I will read it .
How much unlike art thou to Portia !
How much unlike my hopes and my deservings !
Who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserves .
Did I deserve no more than a fool's head ?
Is that my prize ? are my deserts no better ?

To offend , and judge , are distinct offices ,
And of opposed natures .

What is here ?

The fire seven times tried this :
Seven times tried that judgment is 
That did never choose amiss .
Some there be that shadows kiss ;
Such have but a shadow's bliss :
There be fools alive , I wis ,
Silver'd o'er ; and so was this .
Take what wife you will to bed ,
I will ever be your head :
So be gone , sir : you are sped .


Still more fool I shall appear 
By the time I linger here :
With one fool's head I came to woo ,
But I go away with two .
Sweet , adieu . I'll keep my oath ,
Patiently to bear my wroth .

Thus hath the candle sing'd the moth .
O , these deliberate fools ! when they do choose ,
They have the wisdom by their wit to lose .

The ancient saying is no heresy :
'Hanging and wiving goes by destiny .' 

Come , draw the curtain , Nerissa .


Where is my lady ?

Here ; what would my lord ?

Madam , there is alighted at your gate 
A young Venetian , one that comes before 
To signify the approaching of his lord ;
From whom he bringeth sensible regreets ,
To wit ,   besides commends and courteous breath ,
Gifts of rich value . Yet I have not seen 
So likely an embassador of love .
A day in April never came so sweet ,
To show how costly summer was at hand ,
As this fore-spurrer comes before his lord .

No more , I pray thee : I am half afeard 
Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee ,
Thou spend'st such high-day wit in praising him .
Come , come , Nerissa ; for I long to see 
Quick Cupid's post that comes so mannerly .

Bassanio , lord Love , if thy will it be !

Now , what news on the Rialto ?

Why , yet it lives there unchecked that Antonio hath a ship of rich lading wracked on the narrow seas ; the Goodwins , I think they call the place ; a very dangerous flat , and fatal , where the carcasses of many a tall ship lie buried , as they say , if my gossip Report be an honest woman of her word .

I would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever knapped ginger , or made her neighbours believe she wept for the death of a third husband . But it is true ,without any slips of prolixity or crossing the plain highway of talk ,that the good Antonio , the honest Antonio ,O , that I had a title good enough to keep his name company !

Come , the full stop .

Ha ! what sayst thou ? Why , the end is , he hath lost a ship .

I would it might prove the end of his losses .

Let me say 'amen' betimes , lest the devil cross my prayer , for here he comes in the likeness of a Jew .

How now , Shylock ! what news among the merchants ?

You knew , none so well , none so well as you , of my daughter's flight .

That's certain : I , for my part , knew the tailor that made the wings she flew withal .

And Shylock , for his own part , knew the bird was fledged ; and then it is the complexion of them all to leave the dam .

She is damned for it .

That's certain , if the devil may be her judge .

My own flesh and blood to rebel !

Out upon it , old carrion ! rebels it at these years ?

I say my daughter is my flesh and blood .

There is more difference between thy flesh and hers than between jet and ivory ; more between your bloods than there is between red wine and Rhenish . But tell us , do you hear whether Antonio have had any loss at sea or no ?

There I have another bad match : a bankrupt , a prodigal , who dare scarce show his head on the Rialto ; a beggar , that used to come so smug upon the mart ; let him look to his bond : he was wont to call me usurer ; let him look to his bond : he was wont to lend money for a Christian courtesy ; let him look to his bond .

Why , I am sure , if he forfeit thou wilt not take his flesh : what's that good for ?

To bait fish withal : if it will feed nothing else , it will feed my revenge . He hath disgraced me , and hindered me half a million , laughed at my losses , mocked at my gains , scorned my nation , thwarted my bargains , cooled my friends , heated mine enemies ; and what's his reason ? I am a Jew . Hath not a Jew eyes ? hath not a Jew hands , organs , dimensions , senses , affections , passions ? fed with the same food , hurt with the same weapons , subject to the same diseases , healed by the same means , warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer , as a Christian is ? If you prick us , do we not bleed ? if you tickle us , do we not laugh ? if you poison us , do we not die ? and if you wrong us , shall we not revenge ? If we are like you in the rest , we will resemble you in that . If a Jew wrong a Christian , what is his humility ? Revenge . If a Christian wrong a Jew , what should his sufferance be by Christian example ? Why , revenge . The villany you teach me I will execute , and it shall go hard but I will better the instruction .


Gentlemen , my master Antonio is at his house , and desires to speak with you both .

We have been up and down to seek him .


Here comes another of the tribe : a third cannot be matched , unless the devil himself turn Jew .


How now , Tubal ! what news from Genoa ? Hast thou found my daughter ?

I often came where I did hear of her , but cannot find her .

Why there , there , there ! a diamond gone , cost me two thousand ducats in Frankfort ! The curse never fell upon our nation till now ; I never felt it till now : two thousand ducats in that ; and other precious , precious jewels . I would my daughter were dead at my foot , and the jewels in her ear ! would she were hearsed at my foot , and the ducats in her coffin ! No news of them ? Why , so : and I know not what's spent in the search : Why thou loss upon loss ! the thief gone with so much , and so much to find the thief ; and no satisfaction , no revenge : nor no ill luck stirring but what lights on my shoulders ; no sighs but of my breathing ; no tears but of my shedding .

Yes , other men have ill luck too . Antonio , as I heard in Genoa ,

What , what , what ? ill luck , ill luck ?

hath an argosy cast away , coming from Tripolis .

I thank God ! I thank God ! Is it true ? is it true ?

I spoke with some of the sailors that escaped the wrack .

I thank thee , good Tubal . Good news , good news ! ha , ha ! Where ? in Genoa ?

Your daughter spent in Genoa , as I heard , one night , fourscore ducats .

Thou stick'st a dagger in me : I shall never see my gold again : fourscore ducats at a sitting ! fourscore ducats !

There came divers of Antonio's creditors in my company to Venice , that swear he cannot choose but break .

I am very glad of it : I'll plague him ; I'll torture him : I am glad of it .

One of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter for a monkey .

Out upon her ! Thou torturest me , Tubal : it was my turquoise ; I had it of Leah when I was a bachelor : I would not have given it for a wilderness of monkeys .

But Antonio is certainly undone .

Nay , that's true , that's very true . Go , Tubal , fee me an officer ; bespeak him a fortnight before . I will have the heart of him , if he forfeit ; for , were he out of Venice , I can make what merchandise I will . Go , go , Tubal , and meet me at our synagogue ; go , good Tubal ; at our synagogue , Tubal .


I pray you , tarry : pause a day or two 
Before you hazard ; for , in choosing wrong .
I lose your company : therefore , forbear awhile .
There's something tells me , but it is not love ,
I would not lose you ; and you know yourself ,
Hate counsels not in such a quality .
But lest you should not understand me well ,
And yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought ,
I would detain you here some month or two 
Before you venture for me . I could teach you 
How to choose right , but then I am forsworn ;
So will I never be : so may you miss me ;
But if you do , you'll make me wish a sin ,
That I had been forsworn . Beshrew your eyes ,
They have o'erlook'd me and divided me :
One half of me is yours , the other half yours ,
Mine own , I would say ; but if mine , then yours ,
And so all yours . O ! these naughty times 
Put bars between the owners and their rights ;
And so , though yours , not yours . Prove it so ,
Let fortune go to hell for it , not I .
I speak too long ; but 'tis to peise the time ,
To eke it and to draw it out in length ,
To stay you from election .

Let me choose ;
For as I am , I live upon the rack .

Upon the rack , Bassanio ! then confess 
What treason there is mingled with your love .

None but that ugly treason of mistrust ,
Which makes me fear th' enjoying of my love :
There may as well be amity and life 
'Tween snow and fire , as treason and my love .

Ay , but I fear you speak upon the rack ,
Where men enforced do speak anything .

Promise me life , and I'll confess the truth .

Well then , confess , and live .

'Confess' and 'love' 
Had been the very sum of my confession :
O happy torment , when my torturer 
Doth teach me answers for deliverance !
But let me to my fortune and the caskets .

Away then ! I am lock'd in one of them :
If you do love me , you will find me out .
Nerissa and the rest , stand all aloof .
Let music sound while he doth make his choice ;
Then , if he lose , he makes a swan-like end ,
Fading in music : that the comparison 
May stand more proper , my eye shall be the stream 
And watery death-bed for him . He may win ;
And what is music then ? then music is 
Even as the flourish when true subjects bow 
To a new-crowned monarch : such it is 
As are those dulcet sounds in break of day 
That creep into the dreaming bridegroom's ear ,
And summon him to marriage . Now he goes ,
With no less presence , but with much more love ,
Than young Alcides , when he did redeem 
The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy 
To the sea-monster : I stand for sacrifice ;
The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives ,
With bleared visages , come forth to view 
The issue of the exploit . Go , Hercules !
Live thou , I live : with much , much more dismay 
I view the fight than thou that mak'st the fray .


Tell me where is fancy bred ,
Or in the heart or in the head ?
How begot , how nourished ?
Reply , reply .
It is engender'd in the eyes ,
With gazing fed ; and fancy dies 
In the cradle where it lies 
Let us all ring fancy's knell ;
I'll begin it ,Ding , dong , bell .


Ding , dong , bell .

So may the outward shows be least themselves :
The world is still deceiv'd with ornament .
In law , what plea so tainted and corrupt 
But , being season'd with a gracious voice ,
Obscures the show of evil ? In religion ,
What damned error , but some sober brow 
Will bless it and approve it with a text ,
Hiding the grossness with fair ornament ?
There is no vice so simple but assumes 
Some mark of virtue on his outward parts .
How many cowards , whose hearts are all as false 
As stairs of sand , wear yet upon their chins 
The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars ,
Who , inward search'd , have livers white as milk ;
And these assume but valour's excrement 
To render them redoubted ! Look on beauty ,
And you shall see 'tis purchas'd by the weight ;
Which therein works a miracle in nature ,
Making them lightest that wear most of it :
So are those crisped snaky golden locks 
Which make such wanton gambols with the wind ,
Upon supposed fairness , often known 
To be the dowry of a second head ,
The skull that bred them , in the sepulchre .
Thus ornament is but the guiled shore 
To a most dangerous sea ; the beauteous scarf 
Veiling an Indian beauty ; in a word ,
The seeming truth which cunning times put on 
To entrap the wisest . Therefore , thou gaudy gold ,
Hard food for Midas , I will none of thee ;
Nor none of thee , thou pale and common drudge 
'Tween man and man : but thou , thou meagre lead ,
Which rather threat'nest than dost promise aught ,
Thy plainness moves me more than eloquence ,
And here choose I : joy be the consequence !

How all the other passions fleet to air ,
As doubtful thoughts , and rash-embrac'd despair ,
And shuddering fear , and green-ey'd jealousy .
O love ! be moderate ; allay thy ecstasy ;
In measure rain thy joy ; scant this excess ;
I feel too much thy blessing ; make it less ,
For fear I surfeit !

What find I here ?

Fair Portia's counterfeit ! What demi-god 
Hath come so near creation ? Move these eyes ?
Or whether , riding on the balls of mine ,
Seem they in motion ? Here are sever'd lips ,
Parted with sugar breath ; so sweet a bar 
Should sunder such sweet friends . Here , in her hairs 
The painter plays the spider , and hath woven 
A golden mesh to entrap the hearts of men 
Faster than gnats in cobwebs : but her eyes !
How could he see to do them ? having made one ,
Methinks it should have power to steal both his 
And leave itself unfurnish'd : yet look , how far 
The substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow 
In underprizing it , so far this shadow 
Doth limp behind the substance . Here's the scroll ,
The continent and summary of my fortune .

You that choose not by the view ,
Chance as fair and choose as true !
Since this fortune falls to you ,
Be content and seek no new .
If you be well pleas'd with this 
And hold your fortune for your bliss ,
Turn you where your lady is 
And claim her with a loving kiss .

A gentle scroll . Fair lady , by your leave ;

I come by note , to give and to receive .
Like one of two contending in a prize ,
That thinks he hath done well in people's eyes ,
Hearing applause and universal shout ,
Giddy in spirit , still gazing in a doubt 
Whether those peals of praise be his or no ;
So , thrice-fair lady , stand I , even so ,
As doubtful whether what I see be true ,
Until confirm'd , sign'd , ratified by you .

You see me , Lord Bassanio , where I stand ,
Such as I am : though for myself alone 
I would not be ambitious in my wish ,
To wish myself much better ; yet , for you 
I would be trebled twenty times myself ;
A thousand times more fair , ten thousand times 
More rich ;
That only to stand high in your account ,
I might in virtues , beauties , livings , friends ,
Exceed account : but the full sum of me 
Is sum of nothing ; which , to term in gross ,
Is an unlesson'd girl , unschool'd , unpractis'd ;
Happy in this , she is not yet so old 
But she may learn ; happier than this ,
She is not bred so dull but she can learn ;
Happiest of all is that her gentle spirit 
Commits itself to yours to be directed ,
As from her lord , her governor , her king .
Myself and what is mine to you and yours 
Is now converted : but now I was the lord 
Of this fair mansion , master of my servants ,
Queen o'er myself ; and even now , but now ,
This house , these servants , and this same myself 
Are yours , my lord . I give them with this ring ;
Which when you part from , lose , or give away ,
Let it presage the ruin of your love ,
And be my vantage to exclaim on you .

Madam , you have bereft me of all words ,
Only my blood speaks to you in my veins ;
And there is such confusion in my powers ,
As , after some oration fairly spoke 
By a beloved prince , there doth appear 
Among the buzzing pleased multitude ;
Where every something , being blent together ,
Turns to a wild of nothing , save of joy ,
Express'd and not express'd . But when this ring 
Parts from this finger , then parts life from hence :
O ! then be bold to say Bassanio's dead .

My lord and lady , it is now our time ,
That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper ,
To cry , good joy . Good joy , my lord and lady !

My Lord Bassanio and my gentle lady ,
I wish you all the joy that you can wish ;
For I am sure you can wish none from me :
And when your honours mean to solemnize 
The bargain of your faith , I do beseech you ,
Even at that time I may be married too .

With all my heart , so thou canst get a wife .

I thank your lordship , you have got me one .
My eyes , my lord , can look as swift as yours :
You saw the mistress , I beheld the maid ;
You lov'd , I lov'd for intermission .
No more pertains to me , my lord , than you .
Your fortune stood upon the caskets there ,
And so did mine too , as the matter falls ;
For wooing here until I sweat again ,
And swearing till my very roof was dry 
With oaths of love , at last , if promise last ,
I got a promise of this fair one here 
To have her love , provided that your fortune 
Achiev'd her mistress .

Is this true , Nerissa ?

Madam , it is , so you stand pleas'd withal .

And do you , Gratiano , mean good faith ?

Yes , faith , my lord .

Our feast shall be much honour'd in your marriage .

We'll play with them the first boy for a thousand ducats .

What ! and stake down ?

No ; we shall ne'er win at that sport , and stake down .
But who comes here ? Lorenzo and his infidel ?
What ! and my old Venetian friend , Salanio ?


Lorenzo , and Salanio , welcome hither ,
If that the youth of my new interest here 
Have power to bid you welcome . By your leave ,
I bid my very friends and countrymen ,
Sweet Portia , welcome .

So do I , my lord :
They are entirely welcome .

I thank your honour . For my part , my lord ,
My purpose was not to have seen you here ;
But meeting with Salanio by the way ,
He did entreat me , past all saying nay ,
To come with him along .

I did , my lord ,
And I have reason for it . Signior Antonio 
Commends him to you .


Ere I ope his letter ,
I pray you , tell me how my good friend doth .

Not sick , my lord , unless it be in mind ;
Nor well , unless in mind : his letter there 
Will show you his estate .

Nerissa , cheer yon stranger ; bid her welcome .
Your hand , Salanio . What's the news from Venice ?
How doth that royal merchant , good Antonio ?
I know he will be glad of our success ;
We are the Jasons , we have won the fleece .

I would you had won the fleece that he hath lost .

There are some shrewd contents in yon same paper ,
That steal the colour from Bassanio's cheek :
Some dear friend dead , else nothing in the world 
Could turn so much the constitution 
Of any constant man . What , worse and worse !
With leave , Bassanio ; I am half yourself ,
And I must freely have the half of anything 
That this same paper brings you .

O sweet Portia !
Here are a few of the unpleasant'st words 
That ever blotted paper . Gentle lady ,
When I did first impart my love to you ,
I freely told you all the wealth I had 
Ran in my veins , I was a gentleman :
And then I told you true ; and yet , dear lady ,
Rating myself at nothing , you shall see 
How much I was a braggart . When I told you 
My state was nothing , I should then have told you 
That I was worse than nothing ; for , indeed ,
I have engag'd myself to a dear friend ,
Engag'd my friend to his mere enemy ,
To feed my means . Here is a letter , lady ;
The paper as the body of my friend ,
And every word in it a gaping wound ,
Issuing life-blood . But is it true , Salanio ?
Hath all his ventures fail'd ? What , not one hit ?
From Tripolis , from Mexico , and England ,
From Lisbon , Barbary , and India ?
And not one vessel 'scape the dreadful touch 
Of merchant-marring rocks ?

Not one , my lord .
Besides , it should appear , that if he had 
The present money to discharge the Jew ,
He would not take it . Never did I know 
A creature , that did bear the shape of man ,
So keen and greedy to confound a man .
He plies the duke at morning and at night ,
And doth impeach the freedom of the state ,
If they deny him justice : twenty merchants ,
The duke himself , and the magnificoes 
Of greatest port , have all persuaded with him ;
But none can drive him from the envious plea 
Of forfeiture , of justice , and his bond .

When I was with him , I have heard him swear 
To Tubal and to Chus , his countrymen ,
That he would rather have Antonio's flesh 
Than twenty times the value of the sum 
That he did owe him ; and I know , my lord ,
If law , authority , and power deny not ,
It will go hard with poor Antonio .

Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble ?

The dearest friend to me , the kindest man ,
The best-condition'd and unwearied spirit 
In doing courtesies , and one in whom 
The ancient Roman honour more appears 
Than any that draws breath in Italy .

What sum owes he the Jew ?

For me , three thousand ducats .

What , no more ?
Pay him six thousand , and deface the bond ;
Double six thousand , and then treble that ,
Before a friend of this description 
Shall lose a hair thorough Bassanio's fault .
First go with me to church and call me wife ,
And then away to Venice to your friend ;
For never shall you lie by Portia's side 
With an unquiet soul . You shall have gold 
To pay the petty debt twenty times over :
When it is paid , bring your true friend along .
My maid Nerissa and myself meantime ,
Will live as maids and widows . Come , away !
For you shall hence upon your wedding-day .
Bid your friends welcome , show a merry cheer ;
Since you are dear bought , I will love you dear .
But let me hear the letter of your friend .

Sweet Bassanio , my ships have all miscarried , my creditors grow cruel , my estate is very low , my bond to the Jew is forfeit ; and since , in paying it , it is impossible I should live , all debts are cleared between you and I , if I might but see you at my death . Notwithstanding , use your pleasure : if your love do not persuade you to come , let not my letter .

O love , dispatch all business , and be gone !

Since I have your good leave to go away ,
I will make haste ; but , till I come again ,
No bed shall e'er be guilty of my stay ,
Nor rest be interposer 'twixt us twain .


Gaoler , look to him : tell not me of mercy ;
This is the fool that lent out money gratis :
Gaoler , look to him .

Hear me yet , good Shylock .

I'll have my bond ; speak not against my bond :
I have sworn an oath that I will have my bond .
Thou call'dst me dog before thou hadst a cause ,
But , since I am a dog , beware my fangs :
The duke shall grant me justice . I do wonder ,
Thou naughty gaoler , that thou art so fond 
To come abroad with him at his request .

I pray thee , hear me speak .

I'll have my bond ; I will not hear thee speak :
I'll have my bond , and therefore speak no more .
I'll not be made a soft and dull-eyed fool ,
To shake the head , relent , and sigh , and yield 
To Christian intercessors . Follow not ;
I'll have no speaking ; I will have my bond .


It is the most impenetrable cur 
That ever kept with men .

Let him alone :
I'll follow him no more with bootless prayers .
He seeks my life ; his reason well I know .
I oft deliver'd from his forfeitures 
Many that have at times made moan to me ;
Therefore he hates me .

I am sure the duke 
Will never grant this forfeiture to hold .

The duke cannot deny the course of law :
For the commodity that strangers have 
With us in Venice , if it be denied ,
'Twill much impeach the justice of the state ;
Since that the trade and profit of the city 
Consisteth of all nations . Therefore , go :
These griefs and losses have so bated me ,
That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh 
To-morrow to my bloody creditor .
Well , gaoler , on . Pray God , Bassanio come 
To see me pay his debt , and then I care not !


Madam , although I speak it in your presence ,
You have a noble and a true conceit 
Of god-like amity ; which appears most strongly 
In bearing thus the absence of your lord .
But if you knew to whom you show this honour ,
How true a gentleman you send relief ,
How dear a lover of my lord your husband ,
I know you would be prouder of the work 
Than customary bounty can enforce you .

I never did repent for doing good ,
Nor shall not now : for in companions 
That do converse and waste the time together ,
Whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love ,
There must be needs a like proportion 
Of lineaments , of manners , and of spirit ;
Which makes me think that this Antonio ,
Being the bosom lover of my lord ,
Must needs be like my lord . If it be so ,
How little is the cost I have bestow'd 
In purchasing the semblance of my soul 
From out the state of hellish cruelty !
This comes too near the praising of myself ;
Therefore , no more of it : hear other things .
Lorenzo , I commit into your hands 
The husbandry and manage of my house 
Until my lord's return : for mine own part ,
I have toward heaven breath'd a secret vow 
To live in prayer and contemplation ,
Only attended by Nerissa here ,
Until her husband and my lord's return .
There is a monastery two miles off ,
And there will we abide . I do desire you 
Not to deny this imposition ,
The which my love and some necessity 
Now lays upon you .

Madam , with all my heart :
I shall obey you in all fair commands .

My people do already know my mind ,
And will acknowledge you and Jessica 
In place of Lord Bassanio and myself .
So fare you well till we shall meet again .

Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you !

I wish your ladyship all heart's content .

I thank you for your wish , and am well pleas'd 
To wish it back on you : fare you well , Jessica .

Now , Balthazar ,
As I have ever found thee honest-true ,
So let me find thee still . Take this same letter ,
And use thou all the endeavour of a man 
In speed to Padua : see thou render this 
Into my cousin's hand , Doctor Bellario ;
And , look , what notes and garments he doth give thee ,
Bring them , I pray thee , with imagin'd speed 
Unto the traject , to the common ferry 
Which trades to Venice . Waste no time in words ,
But get thee gone : I shall be there before thee .

Madam , I go with all convenient speed .


Come on , Nerissa : I have work in hand 
That you yet know not of : we'll see our husbands 
Before they think of us .

Shall they see us ?

They shall , Nerissa ; but in such a habit 
That they shall think we are accomplished 
With that we lack . I'll hold thee any wager ,
When we are both accoutred like young men ,
I'll prove the prettier fellow of the two ,
And wear my dagger with the braver grace ,
And speak between the change of man and boy 
With a reed voice , and turn two mincing steps 
Into a manly stride , and speak of frays 
Like a fine bragging youth , and tell quaint lies ,
How honourable ladies sought my love ,
Which I denying , they fell sick and died :
I could not do withal ; then I'll repent ,
And wish , for all that , that I had not kill'd them :
And twenty of these puny lies I'll tell ,
That men shall swear I have discontinu'd school 
Above a twelvemonth . I have within my mind 
A thousand raw tricks of these bragging Jacks ,
Which I will practise .

Why , shall we turn to men ?

Fie , what a question's that ,
If thou wert near a lewd interpreter !
But come : I'll tell thee all my whole device 
When I am in my coach , which stays for us 
At the park gate ; and therefore haste away ,
For we must measure twenty miles to-day .


Yes , truly ; for , look you , the sins of the father are to be laid upon the children ; therefore , I promise you , I fear you . I was always plain with you , and so now I speak my agitation of the matter : therefore be of good cheer ; for , truly , I think you are damned . There is but one hope in it that can do you any good , and that is but a kind of bastard hope neither .

And what hope is that , I pray thee ?

Marry , you may partly hope that your father got you not , that you are not the Jew's daughter .

That were a kind of bastard hope , indeed : so the sins of my mother should be visited upon me .

Truly then I fear you are damned both by father and mother : thus when I shun Scylla , your father , I fall into Charybdis , your mother : well , you are gone both ways .

I shall be saved by my husband ; he hath made me a Christian .

Truly the more to blame he : we were Christians enow before ; e'en as many as could well live one by another . This making of Christians will raise the price of hogs : if we grow all to be pork-eaters , we shall not shortly have a rasher on the coals for money .

I'll tell my husband , Launcelot , what you say : here he comes .


I shall grow jealous of you shortly , Launcelot , if you thus get my wife into corners .

Nay , you need not fear us , Lorenzo : Launcelot and I are out . He tells me flatly , there is no mercy for me in heaven , because I am a Jew's daughter : and he says you are no good member of the commonwealth , for , in converting Jews to Christians , you raise the price of pork .

I shall answer that better to the commonwealth than you can the getting up of the negro's belly : the Moor is with child by you , Launcelot .

It is much that the Moor should be more than reason ; but if she be less than an honest woman , she is indeed more than I took her for .

How every fool can play upon the word ! I think the best grace of wit will shortly turn into silence , and discourse grow commendable in none only but parrots . Go in , sirrah : bid them prepare for dinner .

That is done , sir ; they have all stomachs .

Goodly Lord , what a wit-snapper are you ! then bid them prepare dinner .

That is done too , sir ; only , 'cover' is the word .

Will you cover , then , sir ?

Not so , sir , neither ; I know my duty .

Yet more quarrelling with occasion ! Wilt thou show the whole wealth of thy wit in an instant ? I pray thee , understand a plain man in his plain meaning : go to thy fellows ; bid them cover the table , serve in the meat , and we will come in to dinner .

For the table , sir , it shall be served in ; for the meat , sir , it shall be covered ; for your coming in to dinner , sir , why , let it be as humours and conceits shall govern .


O dear discretion , how his words are suited !
The fool hath planted in his memory 
An army of good words : and I do know 
A many fools , that stand in better place ,
Garnish'd like him , that for a tricksy word 
Defy the matter . How cheer'st thou , Jessica ?
And now , good sweet , say thy opinion ;
How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio's wife ?

Past all expressing . It is very meet ,
The Lord Bassanio live an upright life ,
For , having such a blessing in his lady ,
He finds the joys of heaven here on earth ;
And if on earth he do not mean it , then 
In reason he should never come to heaven .
Why , if two gods should play some heavenly match ,
And on the wager lay two earthly women ,
And Portia one , there must be something else 
Pawn'd with the other , for the poor rude world 
Hath not her fellow .

Even such a husband 
Hast thou of me as she is for a wife .

Nay , but ask my opinion too of that .

I will anon ; first , let us go to dinner .

Nay , let me praise you while I have a stomach .

No , pray thee , let it serve for table-talk ; Then howsoe'er thou speak'st , 'mong other things I shall digest it .

Well , I'll set you forth .

What , is Antonio here ?

Ready , so please your Grace .

I am sorry for thee : thou art come to answer 
A stony adversary , an inhuman wretch 
Uncapable of pity , void and empty 
From any dram of mercy .

I have heard 
Your Grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify 
His rigorous course ; but since he stands obdurate ,
And that no lawful means can carry me 
Out of his envy's reach , I do oppose 
My patience to his fury , and am arm'd 
To suffer with a quietness of spirit 
The very tyranny and rage of his .

Go one , and call the Jew into the court .

He's ready at the door : he comes , my lord .


Make room , and let him stand before our face .
Shylock , the world thinks , and I think so too ,
That thou but lead'st this fashion of thy malice 
To the last hour of act ; and then 'tis thought 
Thou'lt show thy mercy and remorse more strange 
Than is thy strange-apparent cruelty ;
And where thou now exact'st the penalty ,
Which is a pound of this poor merchant's flesh ,
Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture ,
But , touch'd with human gentleness and love ,
Forgive a moiety of the principal ;
Glancing an eye of pity on his losses ,
That have of late so huddled on his back ,
Enow to press a royal merchant down ,
And pluck commiseration of his state 
From brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint ,
From stubborn Turks and Tartars , never train'd 
To offices of tender courtesy .
We all expect a gentle answer , Jew .

I have possess'd your Grace of what I purpose ;
And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn 
To have the due and forfeit of my bond :
If you deny it , let the danger light 
Upon your charter and your city's freedom .
You'll ask me , why I rather choose to have 
A weight of carrion flesh than to receive 
Three thousand ducats : I'll not answer that :
But say it is my humour : is it answer'd ?
What if my house be troubled with a rat ,
And I be pleas'd to give ten thousand ducats 
To have it ban'd ? What , are you answer'd yet ?
Some men there are love not a gaping pig ;
Some , that are mad if they behold a cat ;
And others , when the bagpipe sings i' the nose ,
Cannot contain their urine : for affection ,
Mistress of passion , sways it to the mood 
Of what it likes , or loathes . Now , for your answer :
As there is no firm reason to be render'd ,
Why he cannot abide a gaping pig ;
Why he , a harmless necessary cat ;
Why he , a wauling bagpipe ; but of force 
Must yield to such inevitable shame 
As to offend , himself being offended ;
So can I give no reason , nor I will not ,
More than a lodg'd hate and a certain loathing 
I bear Antonio , that I follow thus 
A losing suit against him . Are you answer'd ?

This is no answer , thou unfeeling man ,
To excuse the current of thy cruelty .

I am not bound to please thee with my answer .

Do all men kill the things they do not love ?

Hates any man the thing he would not kill ?

Every offence is not a hate at first .

What ! wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice ?

I pray you , think you question with the Jew :
You may as well go stand upon the beach ,
And bid the main flood bate his usual height ;
You may as well use question with the wolf ,
Why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb ;
You may as well forbid the mountain pines 
To wag their high tops , and to make no noise 
When they are fretted with the gusts of heaven ;
You may as well do anything most hard ,
As seek to soften that than which what's harder ?
His Jewish heart : therefore , I do beseech you ,
Make no more offers , use no further means ;
But with all brief and plain conveniency ,
Let me have judgment , and the Jew his will .

For thy three thousand ducats here is six .

If every ducat in six thousand ducats 
Were in six parts and every part a ducat ,
I would not draw them ; I would have my bond .

How shalt thou hope for mercy , rendering none ?

What judgment shall I dread , doing no wrong ?
You have among you many a purchas'd slave ,
Which , like your asses and your dogs and mules ,
You use in abject and in slavish parts ,
Because you bought them : shall I say to you ,
Let them be free , marry them to your heirs ?
Why sweat they under burdens ? let their beds 
Be made as soft as yours , and let their palates 
Be season'd with such viands ? You will answer :
'The slaves are ours :' so do I answer you :
The pound of flesh which I demand of him ,
Is dearly bought ; 'tis mine and I will have it .
If you deny me , fie upon your law !
There is no force in the decrees of Venice .
I stand for judgment : answer ; shall I have it ?

Upon my power I may dismiss this court ,
Unless Bellario , a learned doctor ,
Whom I have sent for to determine this ,
Come here to-day .

My lord , here stays without 
A messenger with letters from the doctor ,
New come from Padua .

Bring us the letters : call the messenger .

Good cheer , Antonio ! What , man , courage yet !
The Jew shall have my flesh , blood , bones , and all ,
Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood .

I am a tainted wether of the flock ,
Meetest for death : the weakest kind of fruit 
Drops earliest to the ground ; and so let me :
You cannot better be employ'd , Bassanio ,
Than to live still , and write mine epitaph .


Came you from Padua , from Bellario ?

From both , my lord . Bellario greets your Grace .


Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly ?

To cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there .

Not on thy sole , but on thy soul , harsh Jew ,
Thou mak'st thy knife keen ; but no metal can ,
No , not the hangman's axe , bear half the keenness 
Of thy sharp envy . Can no prayers pierce thee ?

No , none that thou hast wit enough to make .

O , be thou damn'd , inexecrable dog !
And for thy life let justice be accus'd .
Thou almost mak'st me waver in my faith 
To hold opinion with Pythagoras ,
That souls of animals infuse themselves 
Into the trunks of men : thy currish spirit 
Govern'd a wolf , who , hang'd for human slaughter ,
Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet ,
And whilst thou lay'st in thy unhallow'd dam ,
Infus'd itself in thee ; for thy desires 
Are wolfish , bloody , starv'd , and ravenous .

Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond ,
Thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud :
Repair thy wit , good youth , or it will fall 
To cureless ruin . I stand here for law .

This letter from Bellario doth commend 
A young and learned doctor to our court .
Where is he ?

He attendeth here hard by ,
To know your answer , whether you'll admit him .

With all my heart : some three or four of you 
Go give him courteous conduct to this place .
Meantime , the court shall hear Bellario's letter .

Your Grace shall understand that at the receipt of your letter I am very sick ; but in the instant that your messenger came , in loving visitation was with me a young doctor of Rome ; his name is Balthazar . I acquainted him with the cause in controversy between the Jew and Antonio the merchant : we turned o'er many books together : he is furnished with my opinion ; which , bettered with his own learning ,the greatness whereof I cannot enough commend ,comes with him , at my importunity , to fill up your Grace's request in my stead I beseech you , let his lack of years be no impediment to let him lack a reverend estimation , for I never knew so young a body with so old a head . I leave him to your gracious acceptance , whose trial shall better publish his commendation .

You hear the learn'd Bellario , what he writes :
And here , I take it , is the doctor come .

Give me your hand . Came you from old Bellario ?

I did , my lord .

You are welcome : take your place .
Are you acquainted with the difference 
That holds this present question in the court ?

I am informed throughly of the cause .
Which is the merchant here , and which the Jew ?

Antonio and old Shylock , both stand forth .

Is your name Shylock ?

Shylock is my name .

Of a strange nature is the suit you follow ;
Yet in such rule that the Venetian law 
Cannot impugn you as you do proceed .


You stand within his danger , do you not ?

Ay , so he says .

Do you confess the bond ?

I do .

Then must the Jew be merciful .

On what compulsion must I ? tell me that .

The quality of mercy is not strain'd ,
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven 
Upon the place beneath : it is twice bless'd ;
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes :
'Tis mightiest in the mightiest ; it becomes 
The throned monarch better than his crown ;
His sceptre shows the force of temporal power ,
The attribute to awe and majesty ,
Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings ;
But mercy is above this sceptred sway ,
It is enthroned in the hearts of kings ,
It is an attribute to God himself ,
And earthly power doth then show likest God's 
When mercy seasons justice . Therefore , Jew ,
Though justice be thy plea , consider this ,
That in the course of justice none of us 
Should see salvation : we do pray for mercy ,
And that same prayer doth teach us all to render 
The deeds of mercy . I have spoke thus much 
To mitigate the justice of thy plea ,
Which if thou follow , this strict court of Venice 
Must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant there .

My deeds upon my head ! I crave the law ,
The penalty and forfeit of my bond .

Is he not able to discharge the money ?

Yes , here I tender it for him in the court ;
Yea , twice the sum : if that will not suffice ,
I will be bound to pay it ten times o'er ,
On forfeit of my hands , my head , my heart .
If this will not suffice , it must appear 
That malice bears down truth . And , I beseech you ,
Wrest once the law to your authority :
To do a great right , do a little wrong ,
And curb this cruel devil of his will .

It must not be . There is no power in Venice 
Can alter a decree established :
'Twill be recorded for a precedent ,
And many an error by the same example 
Will rush into the state . It cannot be .

A Daniel come to judgment ! yea , a Daniel !
O wise young judge , how I do honour thee !

I pray you , let me look upon the bond .

Here 'tis , most reverend doctor ; here it is .

Shylock , there's thrice thy money offer'd thee .

An oath , an oath , I have an oath in heaven :
Shall I lay perjury upon my soul ?
No , not for Venice .

Why , this bond is forfeit ;
And lawfully by this the Jew may claim 
A pound of flesh , to be by him cut off 
Nearest the merchant's heart . Be merciful :
Take thrice thy money ; bid me tear the bond .

When it is paid according to the tenour .
It doth appear you are a worthy judge ;
You know the law , your exposition 
Hath been most sound : I charge you by the law ,
Whereof you are a well-deserving pillar ,
Proceed to judgment : by my soul I swear 
There is no power in the tongue of man 
To alter me . I stay here on my bond .

Most heartily I do beseech the court 
To give the judgment .

Why then , thus it is :
You must prepare your bosom for his knife .

O noble judge ! O excellent young man !

For , the intent and purpose of the law 
Hath full relation to the penalty ,
Which here appeareth due upon the bond .

'Tis very true ! O wise and upright judge !
How much more elder art thou than thy looks !

Therefore lay bare your bosom .

Ay , 'his breast :' 
So says the bond :doth it not , noble judge ?
'Nearest his heart :' those are the very words .

It is so . Are there balance here to weigh 
The flesh ?

I have them ready .

Have by some surgeon , Shylock , on your charge ,
To stop his wounds , lest he do bleed to death .

Is it so nominated in the bond ?

It is not so express'd ; but what of that ?
'Twere good you do so much for charity .

I cannot find it : 'tis not in the bond .

You , merchant , have you anything to say ?

But little : I am arm'd and well prepar'd .
Give me your hand , Bassanio : fare you well !
Grieve not that I am fallen to this for you ;
For herein Fortune shows herself more kind 
Than is her custom : it is still her use 
To let the wretched man outlive his wealth ,
To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow 
An age of poverty ; from which lingering penance 
Of such a misery doth she cut me off .
Commend me to your honourable wife :
Tell her the process of Antonio's end ;
Say how I lov'd you , speak me fair in death ;
And , when the tale is told , bid her be judge 
Whether Bassanio had not once a love .
Repent not you that you shall lose your friend ,
And he repents not that he pays your debt ;
For if the Jew do cut but deep enough ,
I'll pay it instantly with all my heart .

Antonio , I am married to a wife 
Which is as dear to me as life itself ;
But life itself , my wife , and all the world ,
Are not with me esteem'd above thy life :
I would lose all , ay , sacrifice them all ,
Here to this devil , to deliver you .

Your wife would give you little thanks for that ,
If she were by to hear you make the offer .

I have a wife , whom , I protest , I love :
I would she were in heaven , so she could 
Entreat some power to change this currish Jew .

'Tis well you offer it behind her back ;
The wish would make else an unquiet house .

These be the Christian husbands ! I have a daughter ;
Would any of the stock of Barabbas 
Had been her husband rather than a Christian !
We trifle time ; I pray thee , pursue sentence .

A pound of that same merchant's flesh is thine :
The court awards it , and the law doth give it .

Most rightful judge !

And you must cut this flesh from off his breast :
The law allows it , and the court awards it .

Most learned judge ! A sentence ! come , prepare !

Tarry a little : there is something else .
This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood ;
The words expressly are 'a pound of flesh :' 
Then take thy bond , take thou thy pound of flesh ;
But , in the cutting it , if thou dost shed 
One drop of Christian blood , thy lands and goods 
Are , by the laws of Venice , confiscate 
Unto the state of Venice .

O upright judge ! Mark , Jew : O learned judge !

Is that the law ?

Thyself shalt see the act ;
For , as thou urgest justice , be assur'd 
Thou shalt have justice , more than thou desir'st .

O learned judge ! Mark , Jew : a learned judge !

I take this offer then : pay the bond thrice ,
And let the Christian go .

Here is the money .

Soft !
The Jew shall have all justice ; soft ! no haste :
He shall have nothing but the penalty .

O Jew ! an upright judge , a learned judge !

Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh .
Shed thou no blood ; nor cut thou less , nor more ,
But just a pound of flesh : if thou tak'st more ,
Or less , than a just pound , be it but so much 
As makes it light or heavy in the substance ,
Or the division of the twentieth part 
Of one poor scruple , nay , if the scale do turn 
But in the estimation of a hair ,
Thou diest and all thy goods are confiscate .

A second Daniel , a Daniel , Jew !
Now , infidel , I have thee on the hip .

Why doth the Jew pause ? take thy forfeiture .

Give me my principal , and let me go .

I have it ready for thee ; here it is .

He hath refus'd it in the open court :
He shall have merely justice , and his bond .

A Daniel , still say I ; a second Daniel !
I thank thee , Jew , for teaching me that word .

Shall I not have barely my principal ?

Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture ,
To be so taken at thy peril , Jew .

Why , then the devil give him good of it !
I'll stay no longer question .

Tarry , Jew :
The law hath yet another hold on you .
It is enacted in the laws of Venice ,
If it be prov'd against an alien 
That by direct or indirect attempts 
He seek the life of any citizen ,
The party 'gainst the which he doth contrive 
Shall seize one half his goods ; the other half 
Comes to the privy coffer of the state ;
And the offender's life lies in the mercy 
Of the duke only , 'gainst all other voice .
In which predicament , I say , thou stand'st ;
For it appears by manifest proceeding ,
That indirectly and directly too 
Thou hast contriv'd against the very life 
Of the defendant ; and thou hast incurr'd 
The danger formerly by me rehears'd .
Down therefore and beg mercy of the duke .

Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself :
And yet , thy wealth being forfeit to the state ,
Thou hast not left the value of a cord ;
Therefore thou must be hang'd at the state's charge .

That thou shalt see the difference of our spirits ,
I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it .
For half thy wealth , it is Antonio's ;
The other half comes to the general state ,
Which humbleness may drive into a fine .

Ay , for the state ; not for Antonio .

Nay , take my life and all ; pardon not that :
You take my house when you do take the prop 
That doth sustain my house ; you take my life 
When you do take the means whereby I live .

What mercy can you render him , Antonio ?

A halter gratis ; nothing else , for God's sake !

So please my lord the duke , and all the court ,
To quit the fine for one half of his goods ,
I am content ; so he will let me have 
The other half in use , to render it ,
Upon his death , unto the gentleman 
That lately stole his daughter :
Two things provided more , that , for this favour ,
He presently become a Christian ;
The other , that he do record a gift ,
Here in the court , of all he dies possess'd ,
Unto his son Lorenzo , and his daughter .

He shall do this , or else I do recant 
The pardon that I late pronounced here .

Art thou contented , Jew ? what dost thou say ?

I am content .

Clerk , draw a deed of gift .

I pray you give me leave to go from hence :
I am not well . Send the deed after me ,
And I will sign it .

Get thee gone , but do it .

In christening thou shalt have two godfathers ;
Had I been judge , thou shouldst have had ten more ,
To bring thee to the gallows , not the font .


Sir , I entreat you home with me to dinner .

I humbly do desire your Grace of pardon :
I must away this night toward Padua ,
And it is meet I presently set forth .

I am sorry that your leisure serves you not .
Antonio , gratify this gentleman ,
For , in my mind , you are much bound to him .


Most worthy gentleman , I and my friend 
Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted 
Of grievous penalties ; in lieu whereof ,
Three thousand ducats , due unto the Jew ,
We freely cope your courteous pains withal .

And stand indebted , over and above ,
In love and service to you evermore .

He is well paid that is well satisfied ;
And I , delivering you , am satisfied ,
And therein do account myself well paid :
My mind was never yet more mercenary .
I pray you , know me when we meet again :
I wish you well , and so I take my leave .

Dear sir , of force I must attempt you further :
Take some remembrance of us , as a tribute ,
Not as a fee . Grant me two things , I pray you ,
Not to deny me , and to pardon me .

You press me far , and therefore I will yield .


Give me your gloves , I'll wear them for your sake ;


And , for your love , I'll take this ring from you .
Do not draw back your hand ; I'll take no more ;
And you in love shall not deny me this .

This ring , good sir ? alas ! it is a trifle ;
I will not shame myself to give you this .

I will have nothing else but only this ;
And now methinks I have a mind to it .

There's more depends on this than on the value .
The dearest ring in Venice will I give you ,
And find it out by proclamation :
Only for this , I pray you , pardon me .

I see , sir , you are liberal in offers :
You taught me first to beg , and now methinks 
You teach me how a beggar should be answer'd .

Good sir , this ring was given me by my wife ;
And , when she put it on , she made me vow 
That I should never sell nor give nor lose it .

That 'scuse serves many men to save their gifts .
An if your wife be not a mad-woman ,
And know how well I have deserv'd the ring ,
She would not hold out enemy for ever ,
For giving it to me . Well , peace be with you .


My Lord Bassanio , let him have the ring :
Let his deservings and my love withal 
Be valu'd 'gainst your wife's commandment .

Go , Gratiano ; run and overtake him ;
Give him the ring , and bring him , if thou canst ,
Unto Antonio's house . Away ! make haste .

Come , you and I will thither presently ,
And in the morning early will we both 
Fly toward Belmont . Come , Antonio .


Inquire the Jew's house out , give him this deed ,
And let him sign it . We'll away to-night ,
And be a day before our husbands home :
This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo .


Fair sir , you are well o'erta'en .
My Lord Bassanio upon more advice 
Hath sent you here this ring , and doth entreat 
Your company at dinner .

That cannot be :
His ring I do accept most thankfully ;
And so , I pray you , tell him : furthermore ,
I pray you , show my youth old Shylock's house .

That will I do .

Sir , I would speak with you .


I'll see if I can get my husband's ring ,
Which I did make him swear to keep for ever .

Thou mayst , I warrant . We shall have old swearing 
That they did give the rings away to men ;
But we'll outface them , and outswear them too .
Away ! make haste : thou know'st where I will tarry .

Come , good sir , will you show me to this house ?

The moon shines bright : in such a night as this ,
When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees 
And they did make no noise , in such a night 
Troilus methinks mounted the Troyan walls ,
And sigh'd his soul toward the Grecian tents ,
Where Cressid lay that night .

In such a night 
Did Thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dew ,
And saw the lion's shadow ere himself ,
And ran dismay'd away .

In such a night 
Stood Dido with a willow in her hand 
Upon the wild sea-banks , and waft her love 
To come again to Carthage .

In such a night 
Medea gather'd the enchanted herbs 
That did renew old  son .

In such a night 
Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew ,
And with an unthrift love did run from Venice ,
As far as Belmont .

In such a night 
Did young Lorenzo swear he lov'd her well ,
Stealing her soul with many vows of faith ,
And ne'er a true one .

In such a night 
Did pretty Jessica , like a little shrew ,
Slander her love , and he forgave it her .

I would out-night you , did no body come ;
But , hark ! I hear the footing of a man .


Who comes so fast in silence of the night ?

A friend .

A friend ! what friend ? your name , I pray you , friend .

Stephano is my name ; and I bring word 
My mistress will before the break of day 
Be here at Belmont : she doth stray about 
By holy crosses , where she kneels and prays 
For happy wedlock hours .

Who comes with her ?

None , but a holy hermit and her maid .
I pray you , is my master yet return'd ?

He is not , nor we have not heard from him .
But go we in , I pray thee , Jessica ,
And ceremoniously let us prepare 
Some welcome for the mistress of the house .


Sola , sola ! wo ha , ho ! sola , sola !

Who calls ?

Sola ! did you see Master Lorenzo ?
Master Lorenzo ! sola , sola !

Leave hollaing , man ; here .

Sola ! where ? where ?

Here .

Tell him there's a post come from my master , with his horn full of good news : my master will be here ere morning .


Sweet soul , let's in , and there expect their coming .
And yet no matter ; why should we go in ?
My friend Stephano , signify , I pray you ,
Within the house , your mistress is at hand ;
And bring your music forth into the air .

How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank !
Here will we sit , and let the sounds of music 
Creep in our ears : soft stillness and the night 
Become the touches of sweet harmony .
Sit , Jessica : look , how the floor of heaven 
Is thick inlaid with patines of bright gold :
There's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st 
But in his motion like an angel sings ,
Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubins ;
Such harmony is in immortal souls ;
But , whilst this muddy vesture of decay 
Doth grossly close it in , we cannot hear it .

Come , ho ! and wake Diana with a hymn :
With sweetest touches pierce your mistress' ear ,
And draw her home with music .


I am never merry when I hear sweet music .

The reason is , your spirits are attentive :
For do but note a wild and wanton herd ,
Or race of youthful and unhandled colts ,
Fetching mad bounds , bellowing and neighing loud ,
Which is the hot condition of their blood ;
If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound ,
Or any air of music touch their ears ,
You shall perceive them make a mutual stand ,
Their savage eyes turn'd to a modest gaze 
By the sweet power of music : therefore the poet 
Did feign that Orpheus drew trees , stones , and floods ;
Since nought so stockish , hard , and full of rage ,
But music for the time doth change his nature .
The man that hath no music in himself ,
Nor is not mov'd with concord of sweet sounds ,
Is fit for treasons , stratagems , and spoils ;
The motions of his spirit are dull as night ,
And his affections dark as Erebus :
Let no such man be trusted . Mark the music .


That light we see is burning in my hall .
How far that little candle throws his beams !
So shines a good deed in a naughty world .

When the moon shone , we did not see the candle .

So doth the greater glory dim the less :
A substitute shines brightly as a king 
Until a king be by , and then his state 
Empties itself , as doth an inland brook 
Into the main of waters . Music ! hark !

It is your music , madam , of the house .

Nothing is good , I see , without respect :
Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day .

Silence bestows that virtue on it , madam .

The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark 
When neither is attended , and I think 
The nightingale , if she should sing by day ,
When every goose is cackling , would be thought 
No better a musician than the wren .
How many things by season season'd are 
To their right praise and true perfection !
Peace , ho ! the moon sleeps with Endymion ,
And would not be awak'd !


That is the voice ,
Or I am much deceiv'd , of Portia .

He knows me , as the blind man knows the cuckoo ,
By the bad voice .

Dear lady , welcome home .

We have been praying for our husbands' welfare ,
Which speed , we hope , the better for our words .
Are they return'd ?

Madam , they are not yet ;
But there is come a messenger before ,
To signify their coming .

Go in , Nerissa :
Give order to my servants that they take 
No note at all of our being absent hence ;
Nor you , Lorenzo ; Jessica , nor you .


Your husband is at hand ; I hear his trumpet :
We are no tell-tales , madam ; fear you not .

This night methinks is but the daylight sick ;
It looks a little paler : 'tis a day ,
Such as the day is when the sun is hid .


We should hold day with the Antipodes ,
If you would walk in absence of the sun .

Let me give light , but let me not be light ;
For a light wife doth make a heavy husband ,
And never be Bassanio so for me :
But God sort all ! You are welcome home , my lord .

I thank you , madam . Give welcome to my friend :
This is the man , this is Antonio ,
To whom I am so infinitely bound .

You should in all sense be much bound to him ,
For , as I hear , he was much bound for you .

No more than I am well acquitted of .

Sir , you are very welcome to our house :
It must appear in other ways than words ,
Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy .

By yonder moon I swear you do me wrong ;
In faith , I gave it to the judge's clerk :
Would he were gelt that had it , for my part ,
Since you do take it , love , so much at heart .

A quarrel , ho , already ! what's the matter ?

About a hoop of gold , a paltry ring 
That she did give me , whose poesy was 
For all the world like cutlers' poetry 
Upon a knife , 'Love me , and leave me not .' 

What talk you of the posy , or the value ?
You swore to me , when I did give it you ,
That you would wear it till your hour of death ,
And that it should lie with you in your grave :
Though not for me , yet for your vehement oaths ,
You should have been respective and have kept it .
Gave it a judge's clerk ! no , God's my judge ,
The clerk will ne'er wear hair on's face that had it .

He will , an if he live to be a man .

Ay , if a woman live to be a man .

Now , by this hand , I gave it to a youth ,
A kind of boy , a little scrubbed boy ,
No higher than thyself , the judge's clerk .
A prating boy , that begg'd it as a fee :
I could not for my heart deny it him .

You were to blame ,I must be plain with you ,
To part so slightly with your wife's first gift ;
A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger ,
And riveted so with faith unto your flesh .
I gave my love a ring and made him swear 
Never to part with it ; and here he stands ,
I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it 
Nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth 
That the world masters . Now , in faith , Gratiano ,
You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief :
An 'twere to me , I should be mad at it .

Why , I were best to cut my left hand off ,
And swear I lost the ring defending it .

My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away 
Unto the judge that begg'd it , and indeed 
Deserv'd it too ; and then the boy , his clerk ,
That took some pains in writing , he begg'd mine ;
And neither man nor master would take aught 
But the two rings .

What ring gave you , my lord ?
Not that , I hope , that you receiv'd of me .

If I could add a lie unto a fault ,
I would deny it ; but you see my finger 
Hath not the ring upon it ; it is gone .

Even so void is your false heart of truth .
By heaven , I will ne'er come in your bed 
Until I see the ring .

Nor I in yours ,
Till I again see mine .

Sweet Portia ,
If you did know to whom I gave the ring ,
If you did know for whom I gave the ring ,
And would conceive for what I gave the ring ,
And how unwillingly I left the ring ,
When naught would be accepted but the ring ,
You would abate the strength of your displeasure .

If you had known the virtue of the ring ,
Or half her worthiness that gave the ring ,
Or your own honour to contain the ring ,
You would not then have parted with the ring .
What man is there so much unreasonable ,
If you had pleas'd to have defended it 
With any terms of zeal , wanted the modesty 
To urge the thing held as a ceremony ?
Nerissa teaches me what to believe :
I'll die for't but some woman had the ring .

No , by my honour , madam , by my soul ,
No woman had it ; but a civil doctor ,
Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me ,
And begg'd the ring , the which I did deny him ,
And suffer'd him to go displeas'd away ;
Even he that did uphold the very life 
Of my dear friend . What should I say , sweet lady ?
I was enforc'd to send it after him ;
I was beset with shame and courtesy ;
My honour would not let ingratitude 
So much besmear it . Pardon me , good lady ,
For , by these blessed candles of the night ,
Had you been there , I think you would have begg'd 
The ring of me to give the worthy doctor .

Let not that doctor e'er come near my house .
Since he hath got the jewel that I lov'd ,
And that which you did swear to keep for me ,
I will become as liberal as you ;
I'll not deny him anything I have ;
No , not my body , nor my husband's bed .
Know him I shall , I am well sure of it :
Lie not a night from home ; watch me like Argus :
If you do not , if I be left alone ,
Now by mine honour , which is yet mine own ,
I'll have that doctor for my bedfellow .

And I his clerk ; therefore be well advis'd 
How you do leave me to mine own protection .

Well , do you so : let me not take him , then ;
For if I do , I'll mar the young clerk's pen .

I am the unhappy subject of these quarrels .

Sir , grieve not you ; you are welcome notwithstanding .

Portia , forgive me this enforced wrong ;
And in the hearing of these many friends ,
I swear to thee , even by thine own fair eyes ,
Wherein I see myself ,

Mark you but that !
In both my eyes he doubly sees himself ;
In each eye , one : swear by your double self ,
And there's an oath of credit .

Nay , but hear me :
Pardon this fault , and by my soul I swear 
I never more will break an oath with thee .

I once did lend my body for his wealth ,
Which , but for him that had your husband's ring ,
Had quite miscarried : I dare be bound again ,
My soul upon the forfeit , that your lord 
Will never more break faith advisedly .

Then you shall be his surety . Give him this ,
And bid him keep it better than the other .

Here , Lord Bassanio ; swear to keep this ring .

By heaven ! it is the same I gave the doctor !

I had it of him : pardon me , Bassanio ,
For , by this ring , the doctor lay with me .

And pardon me , my gentle Gratiano ;
For that same scrubbed boy , the doctor's clerk ,
In lieu of this last night did lie with me .

Why , this is like the mending of highways 
In summer , where the ways are fair enough .
What ! are we cuckolds ere we have deserv'd it ?

Speak not so grossly . You are all amaz'd :
Here is a letter ; read it at your leisure ;
It comes from Padus , from Bellario :
There you shall find that Portia was the doctor ,
Nerissa , there , her clerk : Lorenzo here 
Shall witness I set forth as soon as you 
And even but now return'd ; I have not yet 
Enter'd my house . Antonio , you are welcome ;
And I have better news in store for you 
Than you expect : unseal this letter soon ;
There you shall find three of your argosies 
Are richly come to harbour suddenly .
You shall not know by what strange accident 
I chanced on this letter .

I am dumb .

Were you the doctor and I knew you not ?

Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold ?

Ay ; but the clerk that never means to do it ,
Unless he live until he be a man .

Sweet doctor , you shall be my bedfellow :
When I am absent , then , lie with my wife .

Sweet lady , you have given me life and living ;
For here I read for certain that my ships 
Are safely come to road .

How now , Lorenzo !
My clerk hath some good comforts too for you .

Ay , and I'll give them him without a fee .
There do I give to you and Jessica ,
From the rich Jew , a special deed of gift ,
After his death , of all he dies possess'd of .

Fair ladies , you drop manna in the way 
Of starved people .

It is almost morning ,
And yet I am sure you are not satisfied 
Of these events at full . Let us go in ;
And charge us there upon inter'gatories ,
And we will answer all things faithfully .

Let it be so : the first inter'gatory 
That my Nerissa shall be sworn on is ,
Whe'r till the next night she had rather stay ,
Or go to bed now , being two hours to day :
But were the day come , I should wish it dark ,
That I were couching with the doctor's clerk .
Well , while I live I'll fear no other thing 
So sore as keeping safe Nerissa's ring .

THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR

Sir Hugh , persuade me not ; I will make a Star-chamber matter of it ; if he were twenty Sir John Falstaffs he shall not abuse Robert Shallow , esquire .

In the county of Gloster , justice of peace , and coram .

Ay , cousin Slender , and cust-alorum .

Ay , and rato-lorum too ; and a gentleman born , Master Parson ; who writes himself armigero , in any bill , warrant , quittance , or obligation ,armigero .

Ay , that I do ; and have done any time these three hundred years .

All his successors gone before him hath done't ; and all his ancestors that come after him may : they may give the dozen white luces in their coat .

It is an old coat .

The dozen white louses do become an old coat well ; it agrees well , passant ; it is a familiar beast to man , and signifies love .

The luce is the fresh fish ; the salt fish is an old coat .

I may quarter , coz ?

You may , by marrying .

It is marring indeed , if he quarter it .

Not a whit .

Yes , py'r lady ; if he has a quarter of your coat , there is but three skirts for yourself , in my simple conjectures : but that is all one . If Sir John Falstaff have committed disparagements unto you , I am of the Church , and will be glad to do my benevolence to make atonements and compremises between you .

The Council shall hear it ; it is a riot .

It is not meet the Council hear a riot ; there is no fear of Got in a riot . The Council , look you , shall desire to hear the fear of Got , and not to hear a riot ; take your vizaments in that .

Ha ! o' my life , if I were young again , the sword should end it .

It is petter that friends is the sword , and end it ; and there is also another device in my prain , which , peradventure , prings goot discretions with it . There is Anne Page , which is daughter to Master Thomas Page , which is pretty virginity .

Mistress Anne Page ? She has brown hair , and speaks small like a woman .

It is that fery person for all the orld , as just as you will desire ; and seven hundred pounds of moneys , and gold and silver , is her grandsire , upon his death's-bed ,Got deliver to a joyful resurrections !give , when she is able to overtake seventeen years old . It were a goot motion if we leave our pribbles and prabbles , and desire a marriage between Master Abraham and Mistress Anne Page .

Did her grandsire leave her seven hundred pound ?

Ay , and her father is make her a petter penny .

I know the young gentlewoman ; she has good gifts .

Seven hundred pounds and possibilities is goot gifts .

Well , let us see honest Master Page . Is Falstaff there ?

Shall I tell you a lie ? I do despise a har as I do despise one that is false ; or as I despise one that is not true . The knight , Sir John , is there ; and , I beseech you , be ruled by your well-willers . I will peat the door for Master Page .

What , hoa ! Got pless your house here !

Who's there ?

Here is Got's plessing , and your friend . and Justice Shallow ; and here young Master Slender , that peradventures shall tell you another tale , if matters grow to your likings .


I am glad to see your worships well . I thank you for my venison , Master Shallow .

Master Page , I am glad to see you : much good do it your good heart ! I wished your venison better ; it was ill killed . How doth good Mistress Page ?and I thank you always with my heart , la ! with my heart .

Sir , I thank you .

Sir , I thank you ; by yea and no , I do .

I am glad to see you , good Master Slender .

How does your fallow greyhound , sir ? I heard say he was outrun on Cotsall .

It could not be judged , sir .

You'll not confess , you'll not confess .

That he will not : 'tis your fault , 'tis your fault . 'Tis a good dog .

A cur , sir .

Sir , he's a good dog , and a fair dog ; can there be more said ? he is good and fair . Is Sir John Falstaff here ?

Sir , he is within ; and I would I could do a good office between you .

It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak .

He hath wronged me , Master Page .

Sir , he doth in some sort confess it .

If it be confessed , it is not redressed : is not that so , Master Page ? He hath wronged me ; indeed , he hath ;at a word , he hath ,believe me : Robert Shallow , esquire , saith , he is wronged .

Here comes Sir John .


Now , Master Shallow , you'll complain of me to the king ?

Knight , you have beaten my men , killed my deer , and broke open my lodge .

But not kissed your keeper's daughter ?

Tut , a pin ! this shall be answered .

I will answer it straight : I have done all this . That is now answered .

The Council shall know this .

'Twere better for you if it were known in counsel : you'll be laughed at .

Pauca verba , Sir John ; goot worts .

Good worts ! good cabbage . Slender , I broke your head : what matter have you against me ?

Marry , sir , I have matter in my head against you ; and against your cony-catching rascals , Bardolph , Nym , and Pistol . They carried me to the tavern , and made me drunk , and afterwards picked my pocket .

You Banbury cheese !

Ay , it is no matter .

How now , Mephistophilus !

Ay , it is no matter .

Slice , I say ! pauca , pauca ; slice ! that's my humour .

Where's Simple , my man ? can you tell , cousin ?

Peace , I pray you . Now let us understand : there is three umpires in this matter , as I understand ; that is Master Page , fidelicet , Master Page ; and there is myself , fidelicet , myself ; and the three party is , lastly and finally , mine host of the Garter .

We three , to hear it and end it between them .

Fery goot : I will make a prief of it in my note-book ; and we will afterwards ork upon the cause with as great discreetly as we can .

Pistol !

He hears with ears .

The tevil and his tam ! what phrase is this , 'He hears with ear ?' Why , it is affectations .

Pistol , did you pick Master Slender's purse ?

Ay , by these gloves , did he ,or I would I might never come in mine own great chamber again else ,of seven groats in mill-sixpences , and two Edward shovel-boards , that cost me two shilling and two pence a-piece of Yead Miller , by these gloves .

Is this true , Pistol ?

No ; it is false , if it is a pick-purse .

Ha , thou mountain foreigner !Sir John and master mine ,
I combat challenge of this latten bilbo .
Word of denial in thy labras here !
Word of denial : froth and scum , thou liest .

By these gloves , then , 'twas he .

Be avised , sir , and pass good humours . I will say , 'marry trap ,' with you , if you run the nuthook's humour on me : that is the very note of it .

By this hat , then , he in the red face had it ; for though I cannot remember what I did when you made me drunk , yet I am not altogether an ass .

What say you , Scarlet and John ?

Why , sir , for my part , I say , the gentleman had drunk himself out of his five sentences .

It is his 'five senses ;' fie , what the ignorance is !

And being fap , sir , was , as they say , cashier'd ; and so conclusions pass'd the careires .

Ay , you spake in Latin then too ; but 'tis no matter . I'll ne'er be drunk whilst I live again , but in honest , civil , godly company , for this trick : if I be drunk , I'll be drunk with those that have the fear of God , and not with drunken knaves .

So Got udge me , that is a virtuous mind .

You hear all these matters denied , gentlemen ; you hear it .


Nay , daughter , carry the wine in ; we'll drink within .


O heaven ! this is Mistress Anne Page .

How now , Mistress Ford !

Mistress Ford , by my troth , you are very well met : by your leave , good mistress .


Wife , bid these gentlemen welcome . Come , we have a hot venison pasty to dinner : come , gentlemen , I hope we shall drink down all unkindness .


I had rather than forty shillings I had my Book of Songs and Sonnets here .

How now , Simple ! Where have you been ? I must wait on myself , must I ? You have not the Book of Riddles about you , have you ?

Book of Riddles ! why , did you not lend it to Alice Shortcake upon All-Hallowmas last , a fortnight afore Michaelmas ?

Come , coz ; come , coz ; we stay for you . A word with you , coz ; marry , this , coz : there is , as 'twere a tender , a kind of tender , made afar off by Sir Hugh here : do you understand me ?

Ay , sir , you shall find me reasonable : if it be so , I shall do that that is reason .

Nay , but understand me .

So I do , sir .

Give ear to his motions , Master Slender : I will description the matter to you , if you pe capacity of it .

Nay , I will do as my cousin Shallow says . I pray you pardon me ; he's a justice of peace in his country , simple though I stand here .

But that is not the question ; the question is concerning your marriage .

Ay , there's the point , sir .

Marry , is it , the very point of it ; to Mistress Anne Page .

Why , if it be so , I will marry her upon any reasonable demands .

But can you affection the 'oman ? Let us command to know that of your mouth or of your lips ; for divers philosophers hold that the lips is parcel of the mouth : therefore , precisely , can you carry your good will to the maid ?

Cousin Abraham Slender , can you love her ?

I hope , sir , I will do as it shall become one that would do reason .

Nay , Got's lords and his ladies ! you must speak possitable , if you can carry her your desires towards her .

That you must . Will you , upon good dowry , marry her ?

I will do a greater thing than that , upon your request , cousin , in any reason .

Nay , conceive me , conceive me , sweet coz : what I do , is to pleasure you , coz . Can you love the maid ?

I will marry her , sir , at your request ; but if there be no great love in the beginning , yet heaven may decrease it upon better acquaintance , when we are married and have more occasion to know one another : I hope , upon familiarity will grow more contempt : but if you say , 'Marry her ,' I will marry her ; that I am freely dissolved , and dissolutely .

It is a fery discretion answer ; save , the faul is in the ort 'dissolutely :' the ort is , according to our meaning , 'resolutely .' His meaning is goot .

Ay , I think my cousin meant well .

Ay , or else I would I might be hanged , la !

Here comes fair Mistress Anne .

Would I were young for your sake , Mistress Anne .

The dinner is on the table ; my father desires your worships' company .

I will wait on him , fair Mistress Anne .

Od's plessed will ! I will not be absence at the grace .


Will't please your worship to come in , sir ?

No , I thank you , forsooth , heartily ; I am very well .

The dinner attends you , sir .

I am not a-hungry , I thank you forsooth . Go , sirrah , for all you are my man , go wait upon my cousin Shallow .

A justice of peace sometime may be beholding to his friend for a man . I keep but three men and a boy yet , till my mother be dead ; but what though ? yet I live like a poor gentleman born .

I may not go in without your worship : they will not sit till you come .

I' faith , I'll eat nothing ; I thank you as much as though I did .

I pray you , sir , walk in .

I had rather walk here , I thank you . I bruised my shin th' other day with playing at sword and dagger with a master of fence ; three veneys for a dish of stewed prunes ;and , by my troth , I cannot abide the smell of hot meat since . Why do your dogs bark so ? be there bears i' the town ?

I think there are , sir ; I heard them talked of .

I love the sport well ; but I shall as soon quarrel at it as any man in England . You are afraid , if you see the bear loose , are you not ?

Ay , indeed , sir .

That's meat and drink to me , now : I have seen Sackerson loose twenty times , and have taken him by the chain ; but , I warrant you , the women have so cried and shrieked at it , that it passed : but women , indeed , cannot abide 'em ; they are very ill-favoured rough things .


Come , gentle Master Slender , come ; we stay for you .

I'll eat nothing , I thank you , sir .

By cock and pie , you shall not choose , sir ! come , come .

Nay , pray you , lead the way .

Come on , sir .

Mistress Anne , yourself shall go first .

Not I , sir ; pray you , keep on .

Truly , I will not go first : truly , la ! I will not do you that wrong .

I pray you , sir .

I'll rather be unmannerly than troublesome . You do yourself wrong , indeed , la !


Go your ways , and ask of Doctor Caius' house , which is the way : and there dwells one Mistress Quickly , which is in the manner of his nurse , or his try nurse , or his cook , or his laundry , his washer , and his wringer .

Well , sir .

Nay , it is petter yet . Give her this letter ; for it is a 'oman that altogether's acquaintance with Mistress Anne Page : and the letter is , to desire and require her to solicit your master's desires to Mistress Anne Page . I pray you , be gone : I will make an end of my dinner ; there's pippins and seese to come .


Mine host of the Garter !

What says my bully-rook ? Speak scholarly and wisely .

Truly , mine host , I must turn away some of my followers .

Discard , bully Hercules ; cashier : let them wag ; trot , trot .

I sit at ten pounds a week .

Thou'rt an emperor , C sar , Keisar , and Pheezar . I will entertain Bardolph ; he shall draw , he shall tap : said I well , bully Hector ?

Do so , good mine host .

I have spoke ; let him follow .

Let me see thee forth and lime : I am at a word ; follow .


Bardolph , follow him . A tapster is a good trade : an old cloak makes a new jerkin ; a withered serving-man , a fresh tapster . Go ; adieu .

It is a life that I have desired . I will thrive .

O base Hungarian wight ! wilt thou the spigot wield ?


He was gotten in drink ; is not the humour conceited ?

I am glad I am so acquit of this tinderbox ; his thefts were too open ; his filching was like an unskilful singer ; he kept not time .

The good humour is to steal at a minim's rest .

'Convey ,' the wise it call . 'Steal !' foh ! a fico for the phrase !

Well , sirs , I am almost out at heels .

Why , then , let kibes ensue .

There is no remedy ; I must conycatch , I must shift .

Young ravens must have food .

Which of you know Ford of this town ?

I ken the wight : he is of substance good .

My honest lads , I will tell you what I am about .

Two yards , and more .

No quips now , Pistol ! Indeed , I am in the waist two yards about ; but I am now about no waste ; I am about thrift . Briefly , I do mean to make love to Ford's wife : I spy entertainment in her ; she discourses , she carves , she gives the leer of invitation : I can construe the action of her familiar style ; and the hardest voice of her behaviour , to be Englished rightly , is , 'I am Sir John Falstaff's .' 

He hath studied her well , and translated her well , out of honesty into English .

The anchor is deep : will that humour pass ?

Now , the report goes she has all the rule of her husband's purse ; he hath a legion of angels .

As many devils entertain , and 'To her , boy ,' say I .

The humour rises ; it is good : humour me the angels .

I have writ me here a letter to her ; and here another to Page's wife , who even now gave me good eyes too , examined my parts with most judicious  illiades : sometimes the beam of her view gilded my foot , sometimes my portly belly .

Then did the sun on dunghill shine .

I thank thee for that humour .

O ! she did so course o'er my exteriors with such a greedy intention , that the appetite of her eye did seem to scorch me up like a burning-glass . Here's another letter to her : she bears the purse too ; she is a region in Guiana , all gold and bounty . I will be 'cheator to them both , and they shall be exchequers to me : they shall be my East and West Indies , and I will trade to them both . Go bear thou this letter to Mistress Page ; and thou this to Mistress Ford . We will thrive , lads , we will thrive .

Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become ,
And by my side wear steel ? then , Lucifer take all !

I will run no base humour : here , take the humour-letter . I will keep the haviour of reputation .

Hold , sirrah , bear you these letters tightly :
Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores .
Rogues , hence ! avaunt ! vanish like hailstones , go ;
Trudge , plod away o'the hoof ; seek shelter , pack !
Falstaff will learn the humour of this age ,
French thrift , you rogues : myself and skirted page .


Let vultures gripe thy guts ! for gourd and fullam holds ,
And high and low beguile the rich and poor .
Tester I'll have in pouch when thou shalt lack ,
Base Phrygian Turk !

I have operations in my head , which be humours of revenge .

Wilt thou revenge ?

By welkin and her star !

With wit or steel ?

With both the humours , I :
I will discuss the humour of this love to Page .


And I to Ford shall eke unfold 
How Falstaff , varlet vile ,
His dove will prove , his gold will hold ,
And his soft couch defile .


My humour shall not cool : I will incense Page to deal with poison ; I will possess him with yellowness , for the revolt of mine is dangerous : that is my true humour .

Thou art the Mars of malcontents : I second thee ; troop on .


What , John Rugby !

I pray thee , go to the casement , and see if you can see my master , Master Doctor Caius , coming : if he do , i' faith , and find anybody in the house , here will be an old abusing of God's patience and the king's English .

I'll go watch .

Go ; and we'll have a posset for't soon at night , in faith , at the latter end of a sea-coal fire .

An honest , willing , kind fellow , as ever servant shall come in house withal ; and , I warrant you , no tell-tale , nor no breed-bate : his worst fault is , that he is given to prayer ; he is something peevish that way , but nobody but has his fault ; but let that pass . Peter Simple you say your name is ?

Ay , for fault of a better .

And Master Slender's your master ?

Ay , forsooth .

Does he not wear a great round beard like a glover's paring-knife ?

No , forsooth : he hath but a little wheyface , with a little yellow beard a cane-coloured beard .

A softly-sprighted man , is he not ?

Ay , forsooth ; but he is as tall a man of his hands as any is between this and his head : he hath fought with a warrener .

How say you ?O ! I should remember him : does he not hold up his head , as it were , and strut in his gait ?

Yes , indeed , does he .

Well , heaven send Anne Page no worse fortune ! Tell Master Parson Evans I will do what I can for your master : Anne is a good girl , and I wish 


Out , alas ! here comes my master .

We shall all be shent . Run in here , good young man ; go into this closet .


'And down , down , adown-a ,'  &c .

Vat is you sing ? I do not like dese toys . Pray you , go and vetch me in my closet une boitine verde ; a box , a green-a box : do intend vat I speak ? a green-a box .

Ay , forsooth ; I'll fetch it you .

I am glad he went not in himself : if he had found the young man , he would have been horn-mad .

Fe , fe , fe , fe ! ma foi , il fait fort chaud . Je m'en vais   la cour ,la grande affaire .

Is it this , sir ?

Oui ; mettez le au mon pocket ; d p chez , quickly .Vere is dat knave Rugby ?

What , John Rugby ! John !


Here , sir .

You are John Rugby , and you are Jack Rugby : come , take-a your rapier , and come after my heel to de court .

'Tis ready , sir , here in the porch .

By my trot , I tarry too long .Od's me ! Qu'ay j'oubli ? dere is some simples in my closet , dat I vill not for de varld I shall leave behind .

Ay me ! he'll find the young man there , and be mad .

O diable ! diable ! vat is in my closet ?Villain ! larron !

Rugby , my rapier !

Good master , be content .

Verefore shall I be content-a ?

The young man is an honest man .

Vat shall de honest man do in my closet ? dere is no honest man dat shall come in my closet .

I beseech you , be not so phlegmatic . Hear the truth of it : he came of an errand to me from Parson Hugh .

Vell .

Ay , forsooth , to desire her to 

Peace , I pray you .

Peace-a your tongue !Speak-a your tale .

To desire this honest gentlewoman , your maid , to speak a good word to Mistress Anne Page for my master in the way of marriage .

This is all , indeed , la ! but I'll ne'er put my finger in the fire , and need not .

Sir Hugh send-a you ?Rugby , baillez me some paper : tarry you a little-a while .


I am glad he is so quiet : if he had been throughly moved , you should have heard him so loud , and so melancholy . But , notwithstanding , man , I'll do your master what good I can ; and the very yea and the no is , the French doctor , my master ,I may call him my master , look you , for I keep his house ; and I wash , wring , brew , bake , scour , dress meat and drink , make the beds , and do all myself ,

'Tis a great charge to come under one body's hand .

Are you avis'd o' that ? you shall find it a great charge : and to be up early and down late ; but notwithstanding ,to tell you in your ear ,I would have no words of it ,my master himself is in love with Mistress Anne Page : but notwithstanding that , I know Anne's mind , that's neither here nor there .

You jack'nape , give-a dis letter to Sir Hugh ; by gar , it is a challenge : I vill cut his troat in de Park ; and I vill teach a scurvy jack-a-nape priest to meddle or make . You may be gone ; it is not good you tarry here : by gar , I vill cut all his two stones ; by gar , he shall not have a stone to trow at his dog .


Alas ! he speaks but for his friend .

It is no matter-a for dat :do not you tell-a me dat I shall have Anne Page for myself ? By gar , I vill kill de Jack priest ; and I have appointed mine host of de Jartiere to measure our weapon . By gar , I vill myself have Anne Page .

Sir , the maid loves you , and all shall be well . We must give folks leave to prate : what , the good-jer !

Rugby , come to the court vit me . By gar , if I have not Anne Page , I shall turn your head out of my door . Follow my heels , Rugby .


You shall have An fool's-head of your own . No , I know Anne's mind for that : never a woman in Windsor knows more of Anne's mind than I do ; nor can do more than I do with her , I thank heaven .

Who's within there ? ho !

Who's there , I trow ? Come near the house , I pray you .


How now , good woman ! how dost thou ?

The better , that it pleases your good worship to ask .

What news ? how does pretty Mistress Anne ?

In truth , sir , and she is pretty , and honest , and gentle ; and one that is your friend , I can tell you that by the way ; I praise heaven for it .

Shall I do any good , thinkest thou ? Shall I not lose my suit ?

Troth , sir , all is in his hands above ; but notwithstanding , Master Fenton , I'll be sworn on a book , she loves you . Have not your worship a wart above your eye ?

Yes , marry have I ; what of that ?

Well , thereby hangs a tale . Good faith , it is such another Nan ; but , I detest , an honest maid as ever broke bread : we had an hour's talk of that wart . I shall never laugh but in that maid's company ;but , indeed , she is given too much to allicholy and musing . But for you well , go to .

Well , I shall see her to-day . Hold , there's money for thee ; let me have thy voice in my behalf : if thou seest her before me , commend me .

Will I ? i' faith , that we will : and I will tell your worship more of the wart the next time we have confidence ; and of other wooers .

Well , farewell ; I am in great haste now .

Farewell to your worship .

Truly , an honest gentleman : but Anne loves him not ; for I know Anne's mind as well as another does . Out upon't ! what have I forgot ?

What ! have I 'scaped love-letters in the holiday-time of my beauty , and am I now a subject for them ? Let me see .

Ask me no reason why I love you ; for though Love use Reason for his physician , he admits him not for his counsellor . You are not young , no more am I ; go to then , there's sympathy ; you are merry , so am I , ha ! ha ! then , there's more sympathy , you love sack , and so do I , would you desire better sympathy ? Let it suffice thee , Mistress Page , at the least , if the love of a soldier can suffice , that I love thee I will not say , pity me ,'tis not a soldier-like phrase ; but I say , love me . By me ,

Thine own true knight ,
By day or night ,
Or any kind of light ,
With all his might 
For thee to fight ,

What a Herod of Jewry is this ! O wicked , wicked world ! one that is well-nigh worn to pieces with age , to show himself a young gallant ! What an unweighed behaviour hath this Flemish drunkard picked , with the devil's name ! out of my conversation , that he dares in this manner assay me ? Why , he hath not been thrice in my company ! What should I say to him ? I was then frugal of my mirth :heaven forgive me ! Why , I'll exhibit a bill in the parliament for the putting down of men . How shall I be revenged on him ? for revenged I will be , as sure as his guts are made of puddings .


Mistress Page ! trust me , I was going to your house .

And , trust me , I was coming to you . You look very ill .

Nay , I'll ne'er believe that : I have to show to the contrary .

Faith , but you do , in my mind .

Well , I do then ; yet , I say I could show you to the contrary . O , Mistress Page ! give me some counsel .

What's the matter , woman ?

O woman , if it were not for one trifling respect , I could come to such honour !

Hang the trifle , woman ; take the honour . What is it ?dispense with trifles ;what is it ?

If I would but go to hell for an eternal moment or so , I could be knighted .

What ? thou liest . Sir Alice Ford ! These knights will hack ; and so thou shouldst not alter the article of thy gentry .

We burn daylight : here , read , read ; perceive how I might be knighted . I shall think the worse of fat men as long as I have an eye to make difference of men's liking : and yet he would not swear ; praised women's modesty ; and gave such orderly and well-behaved reproof to all uncomeliness , that I would have sworn his disposition would have gone to the truth of his words ; but they do no more adhere and keep place together than the Hundredth Psalm to the tune of 'Green Sleeves .' What tempest , I trow , threw this whale , with so many tuns of oil in his belly , ashore at Windsor ? How shall I be revenged on him ? I think , the best way were to entertain him with hope , till the wicked fire of lust have melted him in his own grease . Did you ever hear the like ?

Letter for letter , but that the name of Page and Ford differs ! To thy great comfort in this mystery of ill opinions , here's the twin brother of thy letter : but let thine inherit first ; for , I protest , mine never shall . I warrant , he hath a thousand of these letters , writ with blank space for different names , sure more , and these are of the second edition . He will print them , out of doubt ; for he cares not what he puts into the press , when he would put us two : I had rather be a grantess , and lie under Mount Pelion . Well , I will find you twenty lascivious turtles ere one chaste man .

Why , this is the very same ; the very hand , the very words . What doth he think of us ?

Nay , I know not : it makes me almost ready to wrangle with mine own honesty . I'll entertain myself like one that I am not acquainted withal ; for , sure , unless he know some strain in me , that I know not myself , he would never have boarded me in this fury .

Boarding call you it ? I'll be sure to keep him above deck .

So will I : if he come under my hatches , I'll never to sea again . Let's be revenged on him : let's appoint him a meeting ; give him a show of comfort in his suit , and lead him on with a fine-baited delay , till he hath pawned his horses to mine host of the Garter .

Nay , I will consent to act any villany against him , that may not sully the chariness of our honesty . O , that my husband saw this letter ! it would give eternal food to his jealousy .

Why , look , where he comes ; and my good man too : he's as far from jealousy , as I am from giving him cause ; and that , I hope , is an unmeasurable distance .

You are the happier woman .

Let's consult together against this greasy knight . Come hither .

Well , I hope it be not so .

Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs :
Sir John affects thy wife .

Why , sir , my wife is not young .

He woos both high and low , both rich and poor ,
Both young and old , one with another , Ford .
He loves the galimaufry : Ford , perpend .

Love my wife !

With liver burning hot : prevent , or go thou ,
Like Sir Act on he , with Ringwood at thy heels .
O ! odious is the name !

What name , sir ?

The horn , I say . Farewell :
Take heed ; have open eye , for thieves do foot by night :
Take heed , ere summer comes or cuckoo-birds do sing .
Away , sir Corporal Nym !
Believe it , Page ; he speaks sense .


I will be patient : I will find out this .

And this is true ; I like not the humour of lying . He hath wronged me in some humours : I should have borne the humoured letter to her , but I have a sword and it shall bite upon my necessity . He loves your wife ; there's the short and the long . My name is Corporal Nym ; I speak , and I avouch 'tis true : my name is Nym , and Falstaff loves your wife . Adieu . I love not the humour of bread and cheese ; and there's the humour of it . Adieu .


'The humour of it ,' quoth'a ! here's a fellow frights humour out of his wits .

I will seek out Falstaff .

I never heard such a drawling , affecting rogue .

If I do find it : well .

I will not believe such a Cataian , though the priest o' the town commended him for a true man .

'Twas a good sensible fellow : well .

How now , Meg !

Whither go you , George ?Hark you .

How now , sweet Frank ! why art thou melancholy ?

I melancholy ! I am not melancholy . Get you home , go .

Faith , thou hast some crotchets in thy head now . Will you go , Mistress Page ?

Have with you . You'll come to dinner , George ?

Look , who comes yonder : she shall be our messenger to this paltry knight .

Trust me , I thought on her : she'll fit it .


You are come to see my daughter Anne ?

Ay , forsooth ; and , I pray , how does good Mistress Anne ?

Go in with us , and see : we'd have an hour's talk with you .


How now , Master Ford !

You heard what this knave told me , did you not ?

Yes ; and you heard what the other told me ?

Do you think there is truth in them ?

Hang 'em , slaves ! I do not think the knight would offer it : but these that accuse him in his intent towards our wives , are a yoke of his discarded men ; very rogues , now they be out of service .

Were they his men ?

Marry , were they .

I like it never the better for that . Does he lie at the Garter ?

Ay , marry , does he . If he should intend this voyage towards my wife , I would turn her loose to him ; and what he gets more of her than sharp words , let it lie on my head .

I do not misdoubt my wife , but I would be loth to turn them together . A man may be too confident : I would have nothing 'lie on my head :' I cannot be thus satisfied .

Look , where my ranting host of the Garter comes . There is either liquor in his pate or money in his purse when he looks so merrily .

How now , mine host !

How now , bully-rook ! thou'rt a gentleman . Cavaliero-justice , I say !

I follow , mine host , I follow . Good even and twenty , good Master Page ! Master Page , will you go with us ? we have sport in hand .

Tell him , cavaliero-justice ; tell him , bully-rook .

Sir , there is a fray to be fought between Sir Hugh the Welsh priest and Caius the French doctor .

Good mine host o' the Garter , a word with you .

What sayest thou , my bully-rook ?


Will you go with us to behold it ? My merry host hath had the measuring of their weapons , and , I think , hath appointed them contrary places ; for , believe me , I hear the parson is no jester . Hark , I will tell you what our sport shall be .


Hast thou no suit against my knight , my guest-cavalier ?

None , I protest : but I'll give you a pottle of burnt sack to give me recourse to him and tell him my name is Brook , only for a jest .

My hand , bully : thou shalt have egress and regress ; said I well ? and thy name shall be Brook . It is a merry knight . Will you go , mynheers ?

Have with you , mine host .

I have heard , the Frenchman hath good skill in his rapier .

Tut , sir ! I could have told you more . In these times you stand on distance , your passes , stoccadoes , and I know not what : 'tis the heart , Master Page ; 'tis here , 'tis here . I have seen the time with my long sword I would have made you four tall fellows skip like rats .

Here , boys , here , here ! shall we wag ?

Have with you . I had rather hear them scold than fight .


Though Page be a secure fool , and stands so firmly on his wife's frailty , yet I cannot put off my opinion so easily . She was in his company at Page's house , and what they made there , I know not . Well , I will look further into't ; and I have a disguise to sound Falstaff . If I find her honest , I lose not my labour ; if she be otherwise , 'tis labour well bestowed .


I will not lend thee a penny .

Why , then the world's mine oyster ,
Which I with sword will open .
I will retort the sum in equipage .

Not a penny . I have been content , sir , you should lay my countenance to pawn : I have grated upon my good friends for three reprieves for you and your coach-fellow Nym ; or else you had looked through the grate , like a geminy of baboons . I am damned in hell for swearing to gentlemen my friends , you were good soldiers and tall fellows ; and when Mistress Bridget lost the handle of her fan , I took't upon mine honour thou hadst it not .

Didst thou not share ? hadst thou not fifteen pence ?

Reason , you rogue , reason : thinkest thou , I'll endanger my soul gratis ? At a word , hang no more about me ; I am no gibbet for you : go : a short knife and a throng !to your manor of Picht-hatch ! go . You'll not bear a letter for me , you rogue !you stand upon your honour !Why , thou unconfinable baseness , it is as much as I can do to keep the terms of mine honour precise . I , I , I , myself sometimes , leaving the fear of God on the left hand and hiding mine honour in my necessity , am fain to shuffle , to hedge and to lurch ; and yet you , rogue , will ensconce your rags , your cat-a-mountain looks , your red-lattice phrases , and your bold-beating oaths , under the shelter of your honour ! You will not do it , you !

I do relent : what wouldst thou more of man ?


Sir , here's a woman would speak with you .

Let her approach .


Give your worship good morrow .

Good morrow , good wife .

Not so , an't please your worship .

Good maid , then .

I'll be sworn 
As my mother was , the first hour I was born .

I do believe the swearer . What with me ?

Shall I vouchsafe your worship a word or two ?

Two thousand , fair woman ; and I'll vouchsafe thee the hearing .

There is one Mistress Ford , sir ,I pray , come a little nearer this ways :I myself dwell with Master Doctor Caius .

Well , on : Mistress Ford , you say ,

Your worship says very true :I pray your worship , come a little nearer this ways .

I warrant thee , nobody hears ; mine own people , mine own people .

Are they so ? God bless them , and make them his servants !

Well : Mistress Ford ; what of her ?

Why , sir , she's a good creature . Lord , Lord ! your worship's a wanton ! Well , heaven forgive you , and all of us , I pray !

Mistress Ford ; come , Mistress Ford ,

Marry , this is the short and the long of it . You have brought her into such a canaries as 'tis wonderful : the best courtier of them all , when the court lay at Windsor , could never have brought her to such a canary ; yet there has been knights , and lords , and gentlemen , with their coaches , I warrant you , coach after coach , letter after letter , gift after gift ; smelling so sweetly all musk , and so rushling , I warrant you , in silk and gold ; and in such alligant terms ; and in such wine and sugar of the best and the fairest , that would have won any woman's heart ; and , I warrant you , they could never get an eye-wink of her . I had myself twenty angels given me this morning ; but I defy all angels , in any such sort , as they say , but in the way of honesty : and , I warrant you , they could never get her so much as sip on a cup with the proudest of them all ; and yet there has been earls , nay , which is more , pensioners ; but , I warrant you , all is one with her .

But what says she to me ? be brief , my good she Mercury .

Marry , she hath received your letter ; for the which she thanks you a thousand times ; and she gives you to notify that her husband will be absence from his house between ten and eleven .

Ten and eleven ?

Ay , forsooth ; and then you may come and see the picture , she says , that you wot of : Master Ford , her husband , will be from home . Alas ! the sweet woman leads an ill life with him ; he's a very jealousy man ; she leads a very frampold life with him , good heart .

Ten and eleven . Woman , commend me to her ; I will not fail her .

Why , you say well . But I have another messenger to your worship : Mistress Page hath her hearty commendations to you too : and let me tell you in your ear , she's as fartuous a civil modest wife , and one , I tell you , that will not miss you morning nor evening prayer , as any is in Windsor , whoe'er be the other : and she bade me tell your worship that her husband is seldom from home ; but , she hopes there will come a time . I never knew a woman so dote upon a man : surely , I think you have charms , la ; yes , in truth .

Not I , I assure thee : setting the attraction of my good parts aside , I have no other charms .

Blessing on your heart for't !

But , I pray thee , tell me this : has Ford's wife and Page's wife acquainted each other how they love me ?

That were a jest indeed ! they have not so little grace , I hope : that were a trick , indeed ! But Mistress Page would desire you to send her your little page , of all loves : her husband has a marvellous infection to the little page ; and , truly , Master Page is an honest man . Never a wife in Windsor leads a better life than she does : do what she will , say what she will , take all , pay all , go to bed when she list , rise when she list , all is as she will : and , truly she deserves it ; for if there be a kind woman in Windsor , she is one . You must send her your page ; no remedy .

Why , I will .

Nay , but do so , then : and , look you , he may come and go between you both ; and in any case have a nay-word , that you may know one another's mind , and the boy never need to understand any thing ; for 'tis not good that children should know any wickedness : old folks , you know , have discretion , as they say , and know the world .

Fare thee well : commend me to them both . There's my purse ; I am yet thy debtor .Boy , go along with this woman .

This news distracts me .

This punk is one of Cupid's carriers .
Clap on more sails ; pursue ; up with your fights ;
Give fire ! she is my prize , or ocean whelm them all !


Sayest thou so , old Jack ? go thy ways ; I'll make more of thy old body than I have done . Will they yet look after thee ? Wilt thou , after the expense of so much money , be now a gainer ? Good body , I thank thee . Let them say 'tis grossly done ; so it be fairly done , no matter .


Sir John , there's one Master Brook below would fain speak with you , and be acquainted with you : and hath sent your worship a morning's draught of sack .

Brook is his name ?

Ay , sir .

Call him in .

Such Brooks are welcome to me , that o'erflow such liquor . Ah , ha ! Mistress Ford and Mistress Page , have I encompassed you ? go to ; via !


Bless your , sir !

And you , sir ; would you speak with me ?

I make bold to press with so little preparation upon you .

You're welcome . What's your will ?Give us leave , drawer .


Sir , I am a gentleman that have spent much : my name is Brook .

Good Master Brook , I desire more acquaintance of you .

Good Sir John , I sue for yours : not to charge you ; for I must let you understand I think myself in better plight for a lender than you are : the which hath something emboldened me to this unseasoned intrusion ; for , they say , if money go before , all ways do lie open .

Money is a good soldier , sir , and will on .

Troth , and I have a bag of money here troubles me : if you will help to bear it , Sir John , take all , or half , for easing me of the carriage .

Sir , I know not how I may deserve to be your porter .

I will tell you , sir , if you will give me the hearing .

Speak , good Master Brook ; I shall be glad to be your servant .

Sir , I hear you are a scholar ,I will be brief with you , and you have been a man long known to me , though I had never so good means , as desire , to make myself acquainted with you . I shall discover a thing to you , wherein I must very much lay open mine own imperfection ; but , good Sir John , as you have one eye upon my follies , as you hear them unfolded , turn another into the register of your own , that I may pass with a reproof the easier , sith you yourself know how easy it is to be such an offender .

Very well , sir ; proceed .

There is a gentlewoman in this town , her husband's name is Ford .

Well , sir .

I have long loved her , and , I protest to you , bestowed much on her ; followed her with a doting observance ; engrossed opportunities to meet her ; fee'd every slight occasion that could but niggardly give me sight of her ; not only bought many presents to give her , but have given largely to many to know what she would have given . Briefly , I have pursued her as love hath pursued me ; which hath been on the wing of all occasions . But whatsoever I have merited , either in my mind or in my means , meed , I am sure , I have received none ; unless experience be a jewel that I have purchased at an infinite rate ; and that hath taught me to say this ,

Love like a shadow flies when substance love pursues ;
Pursuing that that flies , and flying what pursues 


Have you received no promise of satisfaction at her hands ?

Never .

Have you importuned her to such a purpose ?

Never .

Of what quality was your love , then ?

Like a fair house built upon another man's ground ; so that I have lost my edifice by mistaking the place where I erected it .

To what purpose have you unfolded this to me ?

When I have told you that , I have told you all . Some say , that though she appear honest to me , yet in other places she enlargeth her mirth so far that there is shrewd construction made of her . Now , Sir John , here is the heart of my purpose : you are a gentleman of excellent breeding , admirable discourse , of great admittance , authentic in your place and person , generally allowed for your many war-like , court-like , and learned preparations .

O , sir !

Believe it , for you know it . There is money ; spend it , spend it ; spend more ; spend all I have ; only give me so much of your time in exchange of it , as to lay an amiable siege to the honesty of this Ford's wife : use your art of wooing , win her to consent to you ; if any man may , you may as soon as any .

Would it apply well to the vehemency of your affection , that I should win what you would enjoy ? Methinks you prescribe to yourself very preposterously .

O , understand my drift . She dwells so securely on the excellency of her honour , that the folly of my soul dares not present itself : she is too bright to be looked against . Now , could I come to her with any detection in my hand , my desires had instance and argument to commend themselves : I could drive her then from the ward of her purity , her reputation , her marriage vow , and a thousand other her defences , which now are too-too strongly embattled against me . What say you to't , Sir John ?

Master Brook , I will first make bold with your money ; next , give me your hand ; and last , as I am a gentleman , you shall , if you will , enjoy Ford's wife .

O good sir !

I say you shall .

Want no money , Sir John ; you shall want none .

Want no Mistress Ford , Master Brook ; you shall want none . I shall be with her , I may tell you , by her own appointment ; even as you came in to me , her assistant or go-between parted from me : I say I shall be with her between ten and eleven ; for at that time the jealous rascally knave her husband will be forth . Come you to me at night ; you shall know how I speed .

I am blest in your acquaintance . Do you know Ford , sir ?

Hang him , poor cuckoldly knave ! I know him not . Yet I wrong him , to call him poor : they say the jealous wittolly knave hath masses of money ; for the which his wife seems to me well-favoured . I will use her as the key of the cuckoldly rogue's coffer ; and there's my harvest-home .

I would you knew Ford , sir , that you might avoid him , if you saw him .

Hang him , mechanical salt-butter rogue ! I will stare him out of his wits ; I will awe him with my cudgel : it shall hang like a meteor o'er the cuckold's horns . Master Brook , thou shalt know I will predominate over the peasant , and thou shalt he with his wife . Come to me soon at night . Ford's a knave , and I will aggravate his style ; thou , Master Brook , shalt know him for knave and cuckold . Come to me soon at night .


What a damned Epicurean rascal is this ! My heart is ready to crack with impatience . Who says this is improvident jealousy ? my wife hath sent to him , the hour is fixed , the match is made . Would any man have thought this ? See the hell of having a false woman ! My bed shall be abused , my coffers ransacked , my reputation gnawn at ; and I shall not only receive this villanous wrong , but stand under the adoption of abominable terms , and by him that does me this wrong . Terms ! names ! Amaimon sounds well ; Lucifer , well ; Barbason , well ; yet they are devils' additions , the names of fiends : but Cuckold ! Wittol !Cuckold ! the devil himself hath not such a name . Page is an ass , a secure ass : he will trust his wife ; he will not be jealous . I will rather trust a Fleming with my butter , Parson Hugh the Welshman with my cheese , an Irishman with my aqua-vit  bottle , or a thief to walk my ambling gelding , than my wife with herself : then she plots , then she ruminates , then she devises ; and what they think in their hearts they may effect , they will break their hearts but they will effect . God be praised for my jealousy ! Eleven o'clock the hour : I will prevent this , detect my wife , be revenged on Falstaff , and laugh at Page . I will about it ; better three hours too soon than a minute too late . Fie , fie , fie ! cuckold ! cuckold ! cuckold !


Jack Rugby !

Sir ?

Vat is de clock , Jack ?

'Tis past the hour , sir , that Sir Hugh promised to meet .

By gar , he has save his soul , dat he is no come : he has pray his Pible vell , dat he is no come . By gar , Jack Rugby , he is dead already , if he be come .

He is wise , sir ; he knew your worship would kill him , if he came .

By gar , de herring is no dead so as I vill kill him . Take your rapier , Jack ; I vill tell you how I vill kill him .

Alas , sir ! I cannot fence .

Villany , take your rapier .

Forbear ; here's company .


Bless thee , bully doctor !

Save you , Master Doctor Caius !

Now , good Master doctor !

Give you good morrow , sir .

Vat be all you , one , two , tree , four , come for ?

To see thee fight , to see thee foin , to see thee traverse ; to see thee here , to see thee there ; to see thee pass thy punto , thy stock , thy reverse , thy distance , thy montant . Is he dead , my Ethiopian ? is he dead , my Francisco ? ha , bully ! What says my  sculapius ? my Galen ? my heart of elder ? ha ! is he dead , bully stale ? is he dead ?

By gar , he is de coward Jack priest of de vorld ; he is not show his face .

Thou art a Castilian King Urinal ! Hector of Greece , my boy !

I pray you , bear vitness that me have stay six or seven , two , tree hours for him , and he is no come .

He is the wiser man , Master doctor : he is a curer of souls , and you a curer of bodies ; if you should fight , you go against the hair of your professions . Is it not true , Master Page ?

Master Shallow , you have yourself been a great fighter , though now a man of peace .

Bodykins , Master Page , though I now be old and of the peace , if I see a sword out , my finger itches to make one . Though we are justices and doctors and churchmen , Master Page , we have some salt of our youth in us ; we are the sons of women , Master Page .

'Tis true , Master Shallow .

It will be found so , Master Page . Master Doctor Caius , I am come to fetch you home . I am sworn of the peace : you have showed yourself a wise physician , and Sir Hugh hath shown himself a wise and patient churchman . You must go with me , Master doctor .

Pardon , guest-justice .A word , Monsieur Mockwater .

Mock-vater ! vat is dat ?

Mock-water , in our English tongue , is valour , bully .

By gar , den , I have as mush mock-vater as de Englishman .   Scurvy jack-dog priest ! by gar , me vill cut his ears .

He will clapper-claw thee tightly , bully .

Clapper-de-claw ! vat is dat ?

That is , he will make thee amends .

By gar , me do look , he shall clapper-de-claw me ; for , by gar , me vill have it .

And I will provoke him to't , or let him wag .

Me tank you for dat .

And moreover , bully ,But first , Master guest , and Master Page , and eke Cavaliero Slender , go you through the town to Frogmore .


Sir Hugh is there , is he ?

He is there : see what humour he is in ; and I will bring the doctor about by the fields . Will it do well ?

We will do it .

Adieu , good Master doctor .


By gar , me vill kill de priest ; for he speak for a jack-an-ape to Anne Page .

Let him die . Sheathe thy impatience ; throw cold water on thy choler : go about the fields with me through Frogmore : I will bring thee where Mistress Anne Page is , at a farmhouse a-feasting ; and thou shalt woo her . Cried I aim ? said I well ?

By gar , me tank you for dat : by gar , I love you ; and I shall procure-a you de good guest , de earl , de knight , de lords , de gentlemen , my patients .

For the which I will be thy adversary toward Anne Page : said I well ?

By gar , 'tis good ; vell said .

Let us wag , then .

Come at my heels , Jack Rugby .

I pray you now , good Master Slender's serving-man , and friend Simple by your name , which way have you looked for Master Caius , that calls himself doctor of physic ?

Marry , sir , the pittie-ward , the parkward , every way ; old Windsor way , and every way but the town way .

I most fehemently desire you you will also look that way .

I will , sir .


Pless my soul ! how full of chollors I am , and trempling of mind ! I shall be glad if he have deceived me . How melancholies I am ! I will knog his urinals about his knave's costard when I have goot opportunities for the 'ork : pless my soul !


To shallow rivers , to whose falls 
Melodious birds sing madrigals ;
There will we make our peds of roses ,
And a thousand fragrant pasies .
To shallow 

Mercy on me ! I have a great dispositions to cry .


Melodious birds sing madrigals ,
When as I sat in Pabylon ,
And a thousand vagram posies .
To shallow ,

Yonder he is coming , this way , Sir Hugh .

He's welcome .


To shallow rivers , to whose falls 

Heaven prosper the right !what weapons is he ?

No weapons , sir . There comes my master , Master Shallow , and another gentleman , from Frogmore , over the stile , this way .

Pray you , give me my gown ; or else keep it in your arms .

How now , Master Parson ! Good morrow , good Sir Hugh . Keep a gamester from the dice , and a good student from his book , and it is wonderful .

Ah , sweet Anne Page !

Save you , good Sir Hugh !

Pless you from His mercy sake , all of you !

What , the sword and the word ! do you study them both , Master Parson ?

And youthful still in your doublet and hose ! this raw rheumatic day ?

There is reasons and causes for it .

We are come to you to do a good office , Master parson .

Fery well : what is it ?

Yonder is a most reverend gentleman , who , belike having received wrong by some person , is at most odds with his own gravity and patience that ever you saw .

I have lived fourscore years and upward ; I never heard a man of his place , gravity , and learning , so wide of his own respect .

What is he ?

I think you know him ; Master Doctor Caius , the renowned French physician .

Got's will , and his passion of my heart ! I had as lief you would tell me of a mess of porridge .

Why ?

He has no more knowledge in Hibbocrates and Galen ,and he is a knave besides ; a cowardly knave as you would desires to be acquainted withal .

I warrant you , he's the man should fight with him .

O , sweet Anne Page !

It appears so , by his weapons . Keep them asunder : here comes Doctor Caius .


Nay , good Master parson , keep in your weapon .

So do you , good Master doctor .

Disarm them , and let them question : let them keep their limbs whole and hack our English .

I pray you , let-a me speak a word vit your ear : verefore vill you not meet-a me ?

Pray you , use your patience : in good time .

By gar , you are de coward , de Jack dog , John ape .

Pray you , let us not be laughing-stogs to other men's humours ; I desire you in friendship , and I will one way or other make you amends : [Aloud .] I will knog your urinals about your knave's cogscomb for missing your meetings and appointments .

Diable !Jack Rugby ,mine host de Jarretierre ,have I not stay for him to kill him ? have I not , at de place I did appoint ?

As I am a Christians soul , now , look you , this is the place appointed : I'll be judgment by mine host of the Garter .

Peace , I say , Gallia and Guallia ; French and Welsh , soul-curer and body-curer !

Ay , dat is very good ; excellent .

Peace , I say ! hear mine host of the Garter . Am I politic ? am I subtle ? am I a Machiavel ? Shall I lose my doctor ? no ; he gives me the potions and the motions . Shall I lose my parson , my priest , my Sir Hugh ? no ; he gives me the proverbs and the no-verbs . Give me thy hand , terrestrial ; so ;give me thy hand celestial ; so . Boys of art , I have deceived you both ; I have directed you to wrong places : your hearts are mighty , your skins are whole , and let burnt sack be the issue . Come , lay their swords to pawn . Follow me , lads of peace ; follow , follow , follow .

Trust me , a mad host !Follow , gentlemen , follow .

O , sweet Anne Page !


Ha ! do I perceive dat ? have you make-a de sot of us , ha , ha ?

This is well ; he has made us his vlouting-stog . I desire you that we may be friends and let us knog our prains together to be revenge on this same scall , scurvy , cogging companion , the host of the Garter .

By gar , vit all my heart . He promise to bring me vere is Anne Page : by gar , he deceive me too .

Well , I will smite his noddles . Pray you , follow .


Nay , keep your way , little gallant : you were wont to be a follower , but now you are a leader . Whether had you rather lead mine eyes , or eye your master's heels ?

I had rather , forsooth , go before you like a man than follow him like a dwarf .

O ! you are a flattering boy : now I see you'll be a courtier .


Well met , Mistress Page . Whither go you ?

Truly , sir , to see your wife : is she at home ?

Ay ; and as idle as she may hang together , for want of company . I think , if your husbands were dead , you two would marry .

Be sure of that ,two other husbands .

Where had you this pretty weathercock ?

I cannot tell what the dickens his name is my husband had him of . What do you call your knight's name , sirrah ?

Sir John Falstaff .

Sir John Falstaff !

He , he ; I can never hit on's name . There is such a league between my good man and he ! Is your wife at home indeed ?

Indeed she is .

By your leave , sir : I am sick till I see her .


Has Page any brains ? hath he any eyes ? hath he any thinking ? Sure , they sleep ; he hath no use of them . Why , this boy will carry a letter twenty mile , as easy as a cannon will shoot point-blank twelve score . He pieces out his wife's inclination ; he gives her folly motion and advantage : and now she's going to my wife , and Falstaff's boy with her . A man may hear this shower sing in the wind : and Falstaff's boy with her ! Good plots ! they are laid ; and our revolted wives share damnation together . Well ; I will take him , then torture my wife , pluck the borrowed veil of modesty from the so seeming Mistress Page , divulge Page himself for a secure and wilful Act on ; and to these violent proceedings all my neighbours shall cry aim .

The clock gives me my cue , and my assurance bids me search ; there I shall find Falstaff . I shall be rather praised for this than mocked ; for it is as positive as the earth is firm , that Falstaff is there : I will go .


Well met , Master Ford .

Trust me , a good knot . I have good cheer at home ; and I pray you all go with me .

I must excuse myself , Master Ford .

And so must I , sir : we have appointed to dine with Mistress Anne , and I would not break with her for more money than I'll speak of .

We have lingered about a match between Anne Page and my cousin Slender , and this day we shall have our answer .

I hope I have your good will , father Page .

You have , Master Slender ; I stand wholly for you : but my wife , Master doctor , is for you altogether .

Ay , by gar ; and de maid is love-a me : my nursh-a Quickly tell me so mush .

What say you to young Master Fenton ? he capers , he dances , he has eyes of youth , he writes verses , he speaks holiday , he smells April and May : he will carry't , he will carry't ; 'tis in his buttons ; he will carry't .

Not by my consent , I promise you . The gentleman is of no having : he kept company with the wild prince and Pointz ; he is of too high a region ; he knows too much . No , he shall not knit a knot in his fortunes with the finger of my substance : if he take her , let him take her simply ; the wealth I have waits on my consent , and my consent goes not that way .

I beseech you heartily , some of you go home with me to dinner : besides your cheer , you shall have sport ; I will show you a monster . Master doctor , you shall go ; so shall you , Master Page ; and you , Sir Hugh .

Well , fare you well : we shall have the freer wooing at Master Page's .


Go home , John Rugby ; I come anon .


Farewell , my hearts : I will to my honest knight Falstaff , and drink canary with him .


I think I shall drink in pipewine first with him ; I'll make him dance . Will you go , gentles ?

Have with you to see this monster .


What , John ! what , Robert !

Quickly , quickly :Is the buckbasket 

I warrant . What , Robin , I say !


Come , come , come .

Here , set it down .

Give your men the charge ; we must be brief .

Marry , as I told you before , John , and Robert , be ready here hard by in the brewhouse ; and when I suddenly call you , come forth , and without any pause or staggering , take this basket on your shoulders : that done , trudge with it in all haste , and carry it among the whitsters in Datchet-mead , and there empty it in the muddy ditch , close by the Thames side .

You will do it ?

I have told them over and over ; they lack no direction . Be gone , and come when you are called .


Here comes little Robin .


How now , my eyas-musket ! what news with you ?

My master , Sir John , is come in at your back-door , Mistress Ford , and requests your company .

You little Jack-a-Lent , have you been true to us ?

Ay , I'll be sworn . My master knows not of your being here , and hath threatened to put me into everlasting liberty if I tell you of it ; for he swears he'll turn me away .

Thou'rt a good boy ; this secrecy of thine shall be a tailor to thee and shall make thee a new doublet and hose . I'll go hide me .

Do so . Go tell thy master I am alone .

Mistress Page , remember you your cue .

I warrant thee ; if I do not act it , hiss me .


Go to , then : we'll use this unwholesome humidity , this gross watery pumpion ; we'll teach him to know turtles from jays .


'Have I caught my heavenly jewel ?' Why , now let me die , for I have lived long enough : this is the period of my ambition : O this blessed hour !

O , sweet Sir John !

Mistress Ford , I cannot cog , I cannot prate , Mistress Ford . Now shall I sin in my wish : I would thy husband were dead . I'll speak it before the best lord , I would make thee my lady .

I your lady , Sir John ! alas , I should be a pitiful lady .

Let the court of France show me such another . I see how thine eye would emulate the diamond : thou hast the right arched beauty of the brow that becomes the ship-tire , the tire-valiant , or any tire of Venetian admittance .

A plain kerchief , Sir John : my brows become nothing else ; nor that well neither .

By the Lord , thou art a traitor to say so : thou wouldst make an absolute courtier ; and the firm fixture of thy foot would give an excellent motion to thy gait in a semi-circled farthingale . I see what thou wert , if Fortune thy foe were not , Nature thy friend . Come , thou canst not hide it .

Believe me , there's no such thing in me .

What made me love thee ? let that persuade thee there's something extraordinary in thee . Come , I cannot cog and say thou art this and that , like a many of these lisping hawthornbuds , that come like women in men s apparel , and smell like Bucklersbury in simple-time ; I cannot ; but I love thee ; none but thee ; and thou deservest it .

Do not betray me , sir . I fear you love Mistress Page .

Thou mightst as well say , I love to walk by the Counter-gate , which is as hateful to me as the reek of a lime-kiln .

Well , heaven knows how I love you ; and you shall one day find it .

Keep in that mind ; I'll deserve it .

Nay , I must tell you , so you do , or else I could not be in that mind .

Mistress Ford ! Mistress Ford ! here's Mistress Page at the door , sweating and blowing and looking wildly , and would needs speak with you presently .

She shall not see me : I will ensconce me behind the arras .

Pray you , do so : she's a very tattling woman .


What's the matter ? how now !

O Mistress Ford ! what have you done ? You're shamed , you are overthrown , you're undone for ever !

What's the matter , good Mistress Page ?

O well-a-day , Mistress Ford ! having an honest man to your husband , to give him such cause of suspicion !

What cause of suspicion ?

What cause of suspicion ! Out upon you ! how am I mistook in you !

Why , alas , what's the matter ?

Your husband's coming hither , woman , with all the officers of Windsor , to search for a gentleman that he says is here now in the house by your consent , to take an ill advantage of his absence : you are undone .

Speak louder .'Tis not so , I hope .

Pray heaven it be not so , that you have such a man here ! but 'tis most certain your husband's coming with half Windsor at his heels , to search for such a one . I come before to tell you . If you know yourself clear , why , I am glad of it ; but if you have a friend here , convey , convey him out . Be not amazed ; call all your senses to you : defend your reputation , or bid farewell to your good life for ever .

What shall I do ?There is a gentleman , my dear friend ; and I fear not mine own shame so much as his peril : I had rather than a thousand pound he were out of the house .

For shame ! never stand 'you had rather' and 'you had rather :' your husband's here at hand ; bethink you of some conveyance : in the house you cannot hide him . O , how have you deceived me ! Look , here is a basket : if he be of any reasonable stature , he may creep in here ; and throw foul linen upon him , as if it were going to bucking : or it is whiting-time send him by your two men to Datchet-mead .

He's too big to go in there . What shall I do ?

Let me see't , let me see't , O , let me see't ! I'll in , I'll in . Follow your friend's counsel . I'll in .

What , Sir John Falstaff ! Are these your letters , knight ?

I love thee , and none but thee ; help me away : let me creep in here . I'll never 


Help to cover your master , boy . Call your men , Mistress Ford . You dissembling knight !

What , John ! Robert ! John !

Go take up these clothes here quickly ; where's the cowl-staff ? look , how you drumble ! carry them to the laundress in Datchet-mead ; quickly , come .

Pray you , come near : if I suspect without cause , why then make sport at me ; then let me be your jest ; I deserve it . How now ! what goes here ? whither bear you this ?

To the laundress , forsooth .

Why , what have you to do whither they bear it ? You were best meddle with buck-washing .

Buck ! I would I could wash myself of the buck ! Buck , buck , buck ! Ay , buck ; I warrant you , buck ; and of the season too , it shall appear .

Gentlemen , I have dreamed to-night ; I'll tell you my dream . Here , here , here be my keys : ascend my chambers ; search , seek , find out : I'll warrant we'll unkennel the fox . Let me stop this way first . [Locking the door .] So , now uncape .

Good Master Ford , be contented : you wrong yourself too much .

True , Master Page . Up , gentlemen ; you shall see sport anon : follow me , gentlemen .


This is fery fantastical humours and jealousies .

By gar , 'tis no de fashion of France ; it is not jealous in France .

Nay , follow him , gentlemen ; see the issue of his search .


Is there not a double excellency in this ?

I know not which pleases me better ; that my husband is deceived , or Sir John .

What a taking was he in when your husband asked who was in the basket !

I am half afraid he will have need of washing ; so throwing him into the water will do him a benefit .

Hang him , dishonest rascal ! I would all of the same strain were in the same distress .

I think my husband hath some special suspicion of Falstaff's being here ; for I never saw him so gross in his jealousy till now .

I will lay a plot to try that ; and we will yet have more tricks with Falstaff : his dissolute disease will scarce obey this medicine .

Shall we send that foolish carrion Mistress Quickly to him , and excuse his throwing into the water ; and give him another hope , to betray him to another punishment ?

We will do it : let him be sent for to-morrow , eight o'clock , to have amends .


I cannot find him : may be the knave bragged of that he could not compass .

Heard you that ?

Ay , ay , peace .You use me well , Master Ford , do you ?

Ay , I do so .

Heaven make you better than your thoughts !

Amen !

You do yourself mighty wrong , Master Ford .

Ay , ay ; I must bear it .

If there pe any pody in the house , and in the chambers , and in the coffers , and in the presses , heaven forgive my sins at the day of judgment !

By gar , nor I too , dere is no bodies .

Fie , fie , Master Ford ! are you not ashamed ? What spirit , what devil suggests this imagination ? I would not ha' your distemper in this kind for the wealth of Windsor Castle .

'Tis my fault , Master Page : I suffer for it .

You suffer for a pad conscience : your wife is as honest a 'omans as I will desires among five thousand , and five hundred too .

By gar , I see 'tis an honest woman .

Well ; I promised you a dinner . Come , come , walk in the Park : I pray you , pardon me ; I will hereafter make known to you why I have done this . Come , wife ; come , Mistress Page . I pray you , pardon me ; pray heartily , pardon me .

Let's go in , gentlemen ; but , trust me , we'll mock him . I do invite you to-morrow morning to my house to breakfast ; after , we'll a-birding together : I have a fine hawk for the bush . Shall it be so ?

Any thing .

If there is one , I shall make two in the company .

If dere be one or two , I shall make-a de turd .

Pray you go , Master Page .

I pray you now , remembrance to-morrow on the lousy knave , mine host .

Dat is good ; by gar , vit all my heart .

A lousy knave ! to have his gibes and his mockeries !


I see I cannot get thy father's love ;
Therefore no more turn me to him , sweet Nan .

Alas ! how then ?

Why , thou must be thyself .
He doth object , I am too great of birth ,
And that my state being gall'd with my expense ,
I seek to heal it only by his wealth .
Besides these , other bars he lays before me ,
My riots past , my wild societies ;
And tells me 'tis a thing impossible 
I should love thee but as a property .

May be he tells you true .

No , heaven so speed me in my time to come !
Albeit I will confess thy father's wealth 
Was the first motive that I woo'd thee , Anne :
Yet , wooing thee , I found thee of more value 
Than stamps in gold or sums in sealed bags ;
And 'tis the very riches of thyself 
That now I aim at .

Gentle Master Fenton ,
Yet seek my father's love ; still seek it , sir :
If opportunity and humblest suit 
Cannot attain it , why , then ,hark you hither .

Break their talk , Mistress Quickly : my kinsman shall speak for himself .

I'll make a shaft or a bolt on't . 'Slid , 'tis but venturing .

Be not dismayed .

No , she shall not dismay me : I care not for that , but that I am afeard .

Hark ye ; Master Slender would speak a word with you .

I come to him .

This is my father's choice .
O , what a world of vile ill-favour'd faults 
Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a year !

And how does good Master Fenton ? Pray you , a word with you .

She's coming ; to her , coz . O boy , thou hadst a father !

I had a father , Mistress Anne ; my uncle can tell you good jests of him . Pray you , uncle , tell Mistress Anne the jest , how my father stole two geese out of a pen , good uncle .

Mistress Anne , my cousin loves you .

Ay , that I do ; as well as I love any woman in Glostershire .

He will maintain you like a gentlewoman .

Ay , that I will , come cut and long-tail , under the degree of a squire .

He will make you a hundred and fifty pounds jointure .

Good Master Shallow , let him woo for himself .

Marry , I thank you for it ; I thank you for that good comfort . She calls you , coz : I'll leave you .

Now , Master Slender .

Now , good Mistress Anne .

What is your will ?

My will ? od's heartlings ! that's a pretty jest , indeed ! I ne'er made my will yet , I thank heaven ; I am not such a sickly creature , I give heaven praise .

I mean , Master Slender , what would you with me ?

Truly , for mine own part , I would little or nothing with you . Your father and my uncle have made motions : if it be my luck , so ; if not , happy man be his dole ! They can tell you how things go better than I can : you may ask your father ; here he comes .


Now , Master Slender : love him , daughter Anne .
Why , how now ! what does Master Fenton here ?
You wrong me , sir , thus still to haunt my house :
I told you , sir , my daughter is dispos'd of .

Nay , Master Page , be not impatient .

Good Master Fenton , come not to my child .

She is no match for you .

Sir , will you hear me ?

No , good Master Fenton .
Come , Master Shallow ; come , son Slender , in .
Knowing my mind , you wrong me , Master Fenton .


Speak to Mistress Page .

Good Mistress Page , for that I love your daughter 
In such a righteous fashion as I do ,
Perforce , against all checks , rebukes and manners ,
I must advance the colours of my love 
And not retire : let me have your good will .

Good mother , do not marry me to yond fool .

I mean it not ; I seek you a better husband .

That's my master , Master doctor .

Alas ! I had rather be set quick i' the earth ,
And bowl'd to death with turnips .

Come , trouble not yourself . Good Master Fenton ,
I will not be your friend nor enemy :
My daughter will I question how she loves you ,
And as I find her , so am I affected .
'Till then , farewell , sir : she must needs go in ;
Her father will be angry .

Farewell , gentle mistress . Farewell , Nan .


This is my doing , now : 'Nay ,' said I , 'will you cast away your child on a fool , and a physician ? Look on Master Fenton .' This is my doing .

I thank thee : and I pray thee , once to-night 
Give my sweet Nan this ring . There's for thy pains .

Now heaven send thee good fortune !

A kind heart he hath : a woman would run through fire and water for such a kind heart . But yet I would my master had Mistress Anne ; or I would Master Slender had her ; or , in sooth , I would Master Fenton had her . I will do what I can for them all three , for so I have promised , and I'll be as good as my word ; but speciously for Master Fenton . Well , I must of another errand to Sir John Falstaff from my two mistresses : what a beast am I to slack it !


Bardolph , I say ,

Here , sir .

Go fetch me a quart of sack ; put a toast in't .

Have I lived to be carried in a basket , and to be thrown in the Thames like a barrow of butcher's offal ? Well , if I be served such another trick , I'll have my brains ta'en out , and buttered , and give them to a dog for a new year's gift . The rogues slighted me into the river with as little remorse as they would have drowned a blind bitch's puppies , fifteen i' the litter ; and you may know by my size that I have a kind of alacrity in sinking : if the bottom were as deep as hell , I should down . I had been drowned but that the shore was shelvy and shallow ; a death that I abhor , for the water swells a man , and what a thing should I have been when I had been swelled ! I should have been a mountain of mummy .


Here's Mistress Quickly , sir , to speak with you .

Come , let me pour in some sack to the Thames water , for my belly's as cold as if I had swallowed snowballs for pills to cool the reins . Call her in .

Come in , woman .


By your leave . I cry you mercy : give your worship good morrow .

Take away these chalices . Go brew me a pottle of sack finely .

With eggs , sir ?

Simple of itself ; I'll no pullet-sperm in my brewage .

How now !

Marry , sir , I come to your worship from Mistress Ford .

Mistress Ford ! I have had ford enough ; I was thrown into the ford ; I have my belly full of ford .

Alas the day ! good heart , that was not her fault : she does so take on with her men ; they mistook their erection .

So did I mine , to build upon a foolish woman's promise .

Well , she laments , sir , for it , that it would yearn your heart to see it . Her husband goes this morning a-birding : she desires you once more to come to her between eight and nine . I must carry her word quickly : she'll make you amends , I warrant you .

Well , I will visit her : tell her so ; and bid her think what a man is : let her consider his frailty , and then judge of my merit .

I will tell her .

Do so . Between nine and ten , sayest thou ?

Eight and nine , sir .

Well , be gone : I will not miss her .

Peace be with you , sir .


I marvel I hear not of Master Brook ; he sent me word to stay within . I like his money well . O ! here he comes .


Bless you , sir !

Now , Master Brook , you come to know what hath passed between me and Ford's wife ?

That , indeed , Sir John , is my business .

Master Brook , I will not lie to you : I was at her house the hour she appointed me .

And how sped you , sir ?

Very ill-favouredly , Master Brook .

How so , sir ? did she change her determination ?

No , Master Brook ; but the peaking cornuto her husband , Master Brook , dwelling in a continual 'larum of jealousy , comes me in the instant of our encounter , after we had embraced , kissed , protested , and , as it were , spoke the prologue of our comedy ; and at his heels a rabble of his companions , thither provoked and instigated by his distemper , and , forsooth , to search his house for his wife's love .

What ! while you were there ?

While I was there .

And did he search for you , and could not find you ?

You shall hear . As good luck would have it , comes in one Mistress Page ; gives intelligence of Ford's approach ; and in her invention , and Ford's wife's distraction , they conveyed me into a buck-basket .

A buck-basket !

By the Lord , a buck-basket ! rammed me in with foul shirts and smocks , socks , foul stockings , greasy napkins ; that , Master Brook , there was the rankest compound of villanous smell that ever offended nostril .

And how long lay you there ?

Nay , you shall hear , Master Brook , what I have suffered to bring this woman to evil for your good . Being thus crammed in the basket , a couple of Ford's knaves , his hinds , were called forth by their mistress to carry me in the name of foul clothes to Datchet-lane : they took me on their shoulders ; met the jealous knave their master in the door , who asked them once or twice what they had in their basket . I quaked for fear lest the lunatic knave would have searched it ; but Fate , ordaining he should be a cuckold , held his hand . Well ; on went he for a search , and away went I for foul clothes . But mark the sequel , Master Brook : I suffered the pangs of three several deaths : first , an intolerable-fright , to be detected with a jealous rotten bell-wether ; next , to be compassed , like a good bilbo , in the circumference of a peck , hilt to point , heel to head ; and then , to be stopped in , like a strong distillation , with stinking clothes that fretted in their own grease : think of that , a man of my kidney , think of that , that am as subject to heat as butter ; a man of continual dissolution and thaw : it was a miracle to 'scape suffocation . And in the height of this bath , when I was more than half stewed in grease , like a Dutch dish , to be thrown into the Thames , and cooled , glowing hot , in that surge , like a horse-shoe ; think of that , hissing hot , think of that , Master Brook !

In good sadness , sir , I am sorry that for my sake you have suffered all this . My suit then is desperate ; you'll undertake her no more ?

Master Brook , I will be thrown into Etna , as I have been into Thames , ere I will leave her thus . Her husband is this morning gone a-birding : I have received from her another embassy of meeting ; 'twixt eight and nine is the hour , Master Brook .

'Tis past eight already , sir .

Is it ? I will then address me to my appointment . Come to me at your convenient leisure , and you shall know how I speed , and the conclusion shall be crowned with your enjoying her : adieu . You shall have her , Master Brook ; Master Brook , you shall cuckold Ford .


Hum ! ha ! is this a vision ? is this a dream ? do I sleep ? Master Ford , awake ! awake , Master Ford ! there's a hole made in your best coat , Master Ford . This 'tis to be married : this 'tis to have linen and buck-baskets ! Well , I will proclaim myself what I am : I will now take the lecher ; he is at my house ; he cannot 'scape me ; 'tis impossible he should ; he cannot creep into a half-penny purse , nor into a pepper-box ; but , lest the devil that guides him should aid him , I will search impossible places . Though what I am I cannot avoid , yet to be what I would not , shall not make me tame : if I have horns to make me mad , let the proverb go with me ; I'll be horn-mad .

Is he at Master Ford's already , thinkest thou ?

Sure he is by this , or will be presently ; but truly , he is very courageous mad about his throwing into the water . Mistress Ford desires you to come suddenly .

I'll be with her by and by : I'll but bring my young man here to school . Look , where his master comes ; 'tis a playing-day , I see .

How now , Sir Hugh ! no school to-day ?

No ; Master Slender is get the boys leave to play .

Blessing of his heart !

Sir Hugh , my husband says my son profits nothing in the world at his book : I pray you , ask him some questions in his accidence .

Come hither , William ; hold up your head ; come .

Come on , sirrah ; hold up your head ; answer your master , be not afraid .

William , how many numbers is in nouns ?

Two .

Truly , I thought there had been one number more , because they say , 'Od's nouns .' 

Peace your tattlings ! What is fair , William ?

Pulcher .

Polecats ! there are fairer things than polecats , sure .

You are a very simplicity 'oman : I pray you peace . What is lapis , William ?

A stone .

And what is a stone , William ?

A pebble .

No , it is lapis : I pray you remember in your prain .

Lapis .

That is a good William . What is he , William , that does lend articles ?

Articles are borrowed of the pronoun , and be thus declined , Singulariter , nominativo , hic , h c , hoc .

Nominativo , hig , hag , hog ; pray you , mark : genitivo , hujus . Well , what is your accusative case ?

Accusativo , hinc .

I pray you , have your remembrance , child ; accusativo , hung , hang , hog .

Hang hog is Latin for bacon , I warrant you .

Leave your prabbles , 'oman . What is the focative case , William ?

O vocativo , O .

Remember , William ; focative is caret .

And that's a good root .

'Oman , forbear .

Peace !

What is your genitive case plural , William ?

Genitive case ?

Ay .

Genitive , horum , harum , horum .

Vengeance of Jenny's case ! fie on her ! Never name her , child , if she be a whore .

For shame , 'oman !

You do ill to teach the child such words . He teaches him to hick and to hack , which they'll do fast enough of themselves , and to call 'horum ?' fie upon you !

'Oman , art thou lunatics ? hast thou no understandings for thy cases and the numbers and the genders ? Thou art as foolish Christian creatures as I would desires .

Prithee , hold thy peace .

Show me now , William , some declensions of your pronouns .

Forsooth , I have forgot .

It is qui , qu , quod ; if you forget your quis , your qu s , and your quods , you must be preeches . Go your ways and play ; go .

He is a better scholar than I thought he was .

He is a good sprag memory . Farewell , Mistress Page .

Adieu , good Sir Hugh .

Get you home , boy . Come , we stay too long .


Mistress Ford , your sorrow hath eaten up my sufferance . I see you are obsequious in your love , and I profess requital to a hair's breadth ; not only , Mistress Ford , in the simple office of love , but in all the accoutrement , complement and ceremony of it . But are you sure of your husband now ?

He's a-birding , sweet Sir John .

What ho ! gossip Ford ! what ho !

Step into the chamber , Sir John .

How now , sweetheart ! who's at home besides yourself ?

Why , none but mine own people .

Indeed !

No , certainly .

Speak louder .

Truly , I am so glad you have nobody here .

Why ?

Why , woman , your husband is in his old lunes again : he so takes on yonder with my husband ; so rails against all married mankind ; so curses all Eve's daughters , of what complexion soever ; and so buffets himself on the forehead , crying , 'Peer out , peer out !' that any madness I ever yet beheld seemed but tameness , civility and patience , to this his distemper he is in now . I am glad the fat knight is not here .

Why , does he talk of him ?

Of none but him ; and swears he was carried out , the last time he searched for him , in a basket : protests to my husband he is now here , and hath drawn him and the rest of their company from their sport , to make another experiment of his suspicion . But I am glad the knight is not here ; now he shall see his own foolery .

How near is he , Mistress Page ?

Hard by ; at street end ; he will be here anon .

I am undone ! the knight is here .

Why then you are utterly shamed , and he's but a dead man . What a woman are you ! Away with him , away with him ! better shame than murder .

Which way should he go ? how should I bestow him ? Shall I put him into the basket again ?


No , I'll come no more i' the basket . May I not go out ere he come ?

Alas ! three of Master Ford's brothers watch the door with pistols , that none shall issue out ; otherwise you might slip away ere he came . But what make you here ?

What shall I do ? I'll creep up into the chimney .

There they always use to discharge their birding-pieces .

Creep into the kiln-hole .

Where is it ?

He will seek there , on my word . Neither press , coffer , chest , trunk , well , vault , but he hath an abstract for the remembrance of such places , and goes to them by his note : there is no hiding you in the house .

I'll go out , then .

If you go out in your own semblance , you die , Sir John . Unless you go out disguised ,

How might we disguise him ?

Alas the day ! I know not . There is no woman's gown big enough for him ; otherwise , he might put on a hat , a muffler , and a kerchief , and so escape .

Good hearts , devise something : any extremity rather than a mischief .

My maid's aunt , the fat woman of Brainford , has a gown above .

On my word , it will serve him ; she's as big as he is : and there's her thrummed hat and her muffler too . Run up , Sir John .

Go , go , sweet Sir John : Mistress Page and I will look some linen for your head .

Quick , quick ! we'll come dress you straight ; put on the gown the while .


I would my husband would meet him in this shape : he cannot abide the old woman of Brainford ; he swears she's a witch ; forbade her my house , and hath threatened to beat her .

Heaven guide him to thy husband's cudgel , and the devil guide his cudgel afterwards !

But is my husband coming ?

Ay , in good sadness , is he ; and talks of the basket too , howsoever he hath had intelligence .

We'll try that ; for I'll appoint my men to carry the basket again , to meet him at the door with it , as they did last time .

Nay , but he'll be here presently : let's go dress him like the witch of Brainford .

I'll first direct my men what they shall do with the basket . Go up ; I'll bring linen for him straight .


Hang him , dishonest varlet ! we cannot misuse him enough .
We'll leave a proof , by that which we will do ,
Wives may be merry , and yet honest too :
We do not act that often jest and laugh ;
'Tis old , but true , 'Still swine eats all the draff .' 

Go , sirs , take the basket again on your shoulders : your master is hard at door ; if he bid you set it down , obey him . Quickly ; dispatch .


Come , come , take it up .

Pray heaven , it be not full of knight again .

I hope not ; I had as lief bear so much lead .


Ay , but if it prove true , Master Page , have you any way then to unfool me again ? Set down the basket , villains . Somebody call my wife . Youth in a basket ! O you panderly rascals ! there's a knot , a ging , a pack , a conspiracy against me : now shall the devil be shamed . What , wife , I say ! Come , come forth ! Behold what honest clothes you send forth to bleaching !

Why , this passes ! Master Ford , you are not to go loose any longer ; you must be pinioned .

Why , this is lunatics ! this is mad as a mad dog !

Indeed , Master Ford , this is not well , indeed .

So say I too , sir .

Come hither , Mistress Ford , the honest woman , the modest wife , the virtuous creature , that hath the jealous fool to her husband ! I suspect without cause , mistress , do I ?

Heaven by my witness , you do , if you suspect me in any dishonesty .

Well said , brazen-face ! hold it out . Come forth , sirrah !


This passes !

Are you not ashamed ? let the clothes alone .

I shall find you anon .

'Tis unreasonable . Will you take up your wife's clothes ? Come away .

Empty the basket , I say !

Why , man , why ?

Master Page , as I am an honest man , there was one conveyed out of my house yesterday in this basket : why may not he be there again ? In my house I am sure he is ; my intelligence is true ; my jealousy is reasonable . Pluck me out all the linen .

If you find a man there he shall die a flea's death .

Here's no man .

By my fidelity , this is not well , Master Ford ; this wrongs you .

Master Ford , you must pray , and not follow the imaginations of your own heart : this is jealousies .

Well , he's not here I seek for .

No , nor nowhere else but in your brain .


Help to search my house this one time : if I find not what I seek , show no colour for my extremity ; let me for ever be your table-sport ; let them say of me , 'As jealous as Ford , that searched a hollow walnut for his wife's leman .' Satisfy me once more ; once more search with me .

What ho , Mistress Page ! come you and the old woman down ; my husband will come into the chamber .

Old woman ! What old woman's that ?

Why , it is my maid's aunt of Brainford .

A witch , a quean , an old cozening quean ! Have I not forbid her my house ? She comes of errands , does she ? We are simple men ; we do not know what's brought to pass under the profession of fortune-telling . She works by charms , by spells , by the figure , and such daubery as this is , beyond our element : we know nothing . Come down , you witch , you hag , you ; come down , I say !

Nay , good , sweet husband ! good gentlemen , let him not strike the old woman .


Come , Mother Prat ; come , give me your hand .

I'll 'prat' her .

Out of my door , you witch , you rag , you baggage , you polecat , you ronyon ! out , out ! I'll conjure you , I'll fortune-tell you .


Are you not ashamed ? I think you have killed the poor woman .

Nay , he will do it . 'Tis a goodly credit for you .

Hang her , witch !

By yea and no , I think the 'oman is a witch indeed : I like not when a 'oman has a great peard ; I spy a great peard under her muffler .

Will you follow , gentlemen ? I beseech you , follow : see but the issue of my jealousy . If I cry out thus upon no trail , never trust me when I open again .

Let's obey his humour a little further . Come , gentlemen .


Trust me , he beat him most pitifully .

Nay , by the mass , that he did not ; he beat him most unpitifully methought .

I'll have the cudgel hallowed and hung o'er the altar : it hath done meritorious service .

What think you ? May we , with the warrant of womanhood and the witness of a good conscience , pursue him with any further revenge ?

The spirit of wantonness is , sure , scared out of him : if the devil have him not in fee-simple , with fine and recovery , he will never , I think , in the way of waste , attempt us again .

Shall we tell our husbands how we have served him ?

Yes , by all means ; if it be but to scrape the figures out of your husband's brains . If they can find in their hearts the poor unvirtuous fat knight shall be any further afflicted , we two will still be the ministers .

I'll warrant they'll have him publicly shamed , and methinks there would be no period to the jest , should he not be publicly shamed .

Come , to the forge with it then ; shape it : I would not have things cool .


Sir , the Germans desire to have three of your horses : the duke himself will be to-morrow at court , and they are going to meet him .

What duke should that be comes so secretly ? I hear not of him in the court . Let me speak with the gentlemen ; they speak English ?

Ay , sir ; I'll call them to you .

They shall have my horses , but I'll make them pay ; I'll sauce them : they have had my house a week at command ; I have turned away my other guests : they must come off ; I'll sauce them . Come .


'Tis one of the pest discretions of a 'oman as ever I did look upon .

And did he send you both these letters at an instant ?

Within a quarter of an hour .

Pardon me , wife . Henceforth do what thou wilt ;
I rather will suspect the sun with cold 
Than thee with wantonness : now doth thy honour stand ,
In him that was of late an heretic ,
As firm as faith .

'Tis well , 'tis well ; no more .
Be not as extreme in submission 
As in ofrence ;
But let our plot go forward : let our wives 
Yet once again , to make us public sport ,
Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow ,
Where we may take him and disgrace him for it .

There is no better way than that they spoke of .

How ? to send him word they'll meet him in the Park at midnight ? Fie , fie ! he'll never come .

You say he has been thrown into the rivers , and has been grievously peaten as an old 'oman : methinks there should be terrors in him that he should not come ; methinks his flesh is punished , he shall have no desires .

So think I too .

Devise but how you'll use him when he comes ,
And let us two devise to bring him thither .

There is an old tale goes that Herne the hunter ,
Sometime a keeper here in Windsor forest ,
Doth all the winter-time , at still midnight ,
Walk round about an oak , with great ragg'd horns ;
And there he blasts the tree , and takes the cattle ,
And makes milch-kine yield blood , and shakes a chain 
In a most hideous and dreadful manner :
You have heard of such a spirit , and well you know 
The superstitious idle-headed eld 
Receiv'd and did deliver to our age 
This tale of Herne the hunter for a truth .

Why , yet there want not many that do fear 
In deep of night to walk by this Herne's oak .
But what of this ?

Marry , this is our device ;
That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us ,
Disguis'd like Herne with huge horns on his head .

Well , let it not be doubted but he'll come ,
And in this shape when you have brought him thither ,
What shall be done with him ? what is your plot ?

That likewise have we thought upon , and thus :
Nan Page my daughter , and my little son ,
And three or four more of their growth , we'll dress 
Like urchins , ouphs and fairies , green and white ,
With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads ,
And rattles in their hands . Upon a sudden ,
As Falstaff , she , and I , are newly met ,
Let them from forth a sawpit rush at once 
With some diffused song : upon their sight ,
We two in great amazedness will fly :
Then let them all encircle him about ,
And , fairy-like , to-pinch the unclean knight ;
And ask him why , that hour of fairy revel ,
In their so sacred paths he dares to tread 
In shape profane .

And till he tell the truth ,
Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound 
And burn him with their tapers .

The truth being known ,
We'll all present ourselves , dis-horn the spirit ,
And mock him home to Windsor .

The children must 
Be practis'd well to this , or they'll ne'er do't .

I will teach the children their behaviours ; and I will be like a jack-an-apes also , to burn the knight with my taber .

That will be excellent . I'll go buy them vizards .

My Nan shall be the queen of all the fairies ,
Finely attired in a robe of white .

That silk will I go buy :

and in that time 
Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away ,
And marry her at Eton . Go , send to Falstaff straight .

Nay , I'll to him again in name of Brook ;
He'll tell me all his purpose . Sure , he'll come .

Fear not you that . Go , get us properties ,
And tricking for our fairies .

Let us about it : it is admirable pleasures and fery honest knaveries .


Go , Mistress Ford ,
Send Quickly to Sir John , to know his mind .

I'll to the doctor : he hath my good will ,
And none but he , to marry with Nan Page .
That Slender , though well landed , is an idiot ;
And him my husband best of all affects :
The doctor is well money'd , and his friends 
Potent at court : he , none but he , shall have her ,
Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her .


What wouldst thou have , boor ? what , thick-skin ? speak , breathe , discuss ; brief , short , quick , snap .

Marry , sir , I come to speak with Sir John Falstaff from Master Slender .

There's his chamber , his house , his castle , his standing-bed and truckle-bed : 'tis painted about with the story of the Prodigal , fresh and new . Go knock and call : he'll speak like an Anthropophaginian unto thee : knock , I say .

There's an old woman , a fat woman , gone up into his chamber : I'll be so bold as stay , sir , till she come down ; I come to speak with her , indeed .

Ha ! a fat woman ! the knight may be robbed : I'll call . Bully knight ! Bully Sir John ! speak from thy lungs military : art thou there ? it is thine host , thine Ephesian , calls .

How now , mine host !

Here's a Bohemian-Tartar tarries the coming down of thy fat woman . Let her descend , bully ; let her descend ; my chambers are honourable : fie ! privacy ? fie !


There was , mine host , an old fat woman even now with me , but she's gone .

Pray you , sir , was't not the wise woman of Brainford ?

Ay , marry , was it , muscle-shell : what would you with her ?

My Master , sir , Master Slender , sent to her , seeing her go thorough the streets , to know , sir , whether one Nym , sir , that beguiled him of a chain , had the chain or no .

I spake with the old woman about it .

And what says she , I pray , sir ?

Marry , she says that the very same man that beguiled Master Slender of his chain cozened him of it .

I would I could have spoken with the woman herself : I had other things to have spoken with her too , from him .

What are they ? let us know .

Ay , come ; quick .

I may not conceal them , sir .

Conceal them , or thou diest .

Why , sir , they were nothing but about Mistress Anne Page ; to know if it were my master's fortune to have her or no .

'Tis , 'tis his fortune .

What , sir ?

To have her , or no . Go ; say the woman told me so .

May I be bold to say so , sir ?

Ay , Sir Tike ; who more bold ?

I thank your worship : I shall make my master glad with these tidings .


Thou art clerkly , thou art clerkly , Sir John . Was there a wise woman with thee ?

Ay , that there was , mine host ; one that hath taught me more wit than ever I learned before in my life : and I paid nothing for it neither , but was paid for my learning .


Out , alas , sir ! cozenage , mere cozenage !

Where be my horses ? speak well of them , varletto .

Run away , with the cozeners ; for so soon as I came beyond Eton , they threw me off , from behind one of them , in a slough of mire ; and set spurs and away , like three German devils , three Doctor Faustuses .

They are gone but to meet the duke , villain . Do not say they be fled : Germans are honest men .


Where is mine host ?

What is the matter , sir ?

Have a care of your entertainments : there is a friend of mine come to town , tells me , there is three cozen-germans that has cozened all the hosts of Readins , of Maidenhead , of Colebrook , of horses and money . I tell you for good will , look you : you are wise and full of gibes and vlouting-stogs , and 'tis not convenient you should be cozened . Fare you well .

Vere is mine host de Jarteer ?

Here , Master doctor , in perplexity and doubtful dilemma .

I cannot tell vat is dat ; but it is tell-a me dat you make grand preparation for a duke de Jamany : by my trot , dere is no duke dat de court is know to come . I tell you for good vill : adieu .


Hue and cry , villain ! go . Assist me , knight ; I am undone . Fly , run , hue and cry , villain ! I am undone !


I would all the world might be cozened , for I have been cozened and beaten too . If it should come to the ear of the court how I have been transformed , and how my transformation hath been washed and cudgelled , they would melt me out of my fat drop by drop , and liquor fishermen's boots with me : I warrant they would whip me with their fine wits till I were as crest-fallen as a dried pear . I never prospered since I forswore myself at primero . Well , if my wind were but long enough to say my prayers , I would repent .

Now , whence come you ?

From the two parties , forsooth .

The devil take one party and his dam the other ! and so they shall be both bestowed . I have suffered more for their sakes , more than the villanous inconstancy of man's disposition is able to bear .

And have not they suffered ? Yes , I warrant ; speciously one of them : Mistress Ford , good heart , is beaten black and blue , that you cannot see a white spot about her .

What tellest thou me of black and blue ? I was beaten myself into all the colours of the rainbow ; and I was like to be apprehended for the witch of Brainford : but that my admirable dexterity of wit , my counterfeiting the action of an old woman , delivered me , the knave constable had set me i' the stocks , i' the common stocks , for a witch .

Sir , let me speak with you in your chamber ; you shall hear how things go , and , I warrant , to your content . Here is a letter will say somewhat . Good hearts ! what ado here is to bring you together ! Sure , one of you does not serve heaven well , that you are so crossed .

Come up into my chamber .


Master Fenton , talk not to me : my mind is heavy ; I will give over all .

Yet hear me speak . Assist me in my purpose ,
And , as I am a gentleman , I'll give thee 
A hundred pound in gold more than your loss .

I will hear you , Master Fenton ; and I will , at the least , keep your counsel .

From time to time I have acquainted you 
With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page ;
Who , mutually hath answer'd my affection ,
So far forth as herself might be her chooser ,
Even to my wish . I have a letter from her 
Of such contents as you will wonder at ;
The mirth whereof so larded with my matter ,
That neither singly can be manifested ,
Without the show of both ; wherein fat Falstaff 
Hath a great scare : the image of the jest 
I'll show you here at large 

Hark , good mine host :
To-night at Herne's oak , just 'twixt twelve and one ,
Must my sweet Nan present the Fairy Queen ;
The purpose why , is here : in which disguise ,
While other jests are something rank on foot ,
Her father hath commanded her to slip 
Away with Slender , and with him at Eton 
Immediately to marry : she hath consented :
Now , sir ,
Her mother , even strong against that match 
And firm for Doctor Caius , hath appointed 
That he shall likewise shuffle her away ,
While other sports are tasking of their minds ;
And at the deanery , where a priest attends ,
Straight marry her : to this her mother's plot 
She , seemingly obedient , likewise hath 
Made promise to the doctor . Now , thus it rests :
Her father means she shall be all in white ,
And in that habit , when Slender sees his time 
To take her by the hand and bid her go ,
She shall go with him : her mother hath intended ,
The better to denote her to the doctor ,
For they must all be mask'd and vizarded 
That quaint in green she shall be loose enrob'd ,
With ribands pendent , flaring 'bout her head ;
And when the doctor spies his vantage ripe ,
To pinch her by the hand ; and on that token 
The maid hath given consent to go with him .

Which means she to deceive , father or mother ?

Both , my good host , to go along with me :
And here it rests , that you'll procure the vicar 
To stay for me at church 'twixt twelve and one ,
And , in the lawful name of marrying ,
To give our hearts united ceremony .

Well , husband your device ; I'll to the vicar .
Bring you the maid , you shall not lack a priest .

So shall I evermore be bound to thee ;
Besides , I'll make a present recompense .

Prithee , no more prattling ; go : I'll hold . This is the third time ; I hope good luck lies in odd numbers . Away ! go . They say there is divinity in odd numbers , either in nativity , chance or death . Away !

I'll provide you a chain , and I'll do what I can to get you a pair of horns .

Away , I say ; time wears : hold up your head , and mince .


How now , Master Brook ! Master Brook , the matter will be known to-night , or never . Be you in the Park about midnight , at Herne's oak , and you shall see wonders .

Went you not to her yesterday , sir , as you told me you had appointed ?

I went to her , Master Brook , as you see , like a poor old man ; but I came from her , Master Brook , like a poor old woman . That same knave Ford , her husband , hath the finest mad devil of jealousy in him , Master Brook , that ever governed frenzy . I will tell you : he beat me grievously , in the shape of a woman ; for in the shape of a man , Master Brook , I fear not Goliath with a weaver's beam , because I know also life is a shuttle . I am in haste : go along with me ; I'll tell you all , Master Brook . Since I plucked geese , played traunt , and whipped top , I knew not what it was to be beaten till lately . Follow me : I'll tell you strange things of this knave Ford , on whom to-night I will be revenged , and I will deliver his wife into your hand . Follow . Strange things in hand , Master Brook ! Follow .


Come , come ; we'll couch i' the castle-ditch till we see the light of our fairies . Remember , son Slender , my daughter .

Ay , forsooth ; I have spoke with her and we have a nayword how to know one another . I come to her in white , and cry , 'mum ;' she cries , 'budget ;' and by that we know one another .

That's good too : but what needs either your 'mum ,' or her 'budget ?' the white will decipher her well enough . It hath struck ten o'clock .

The night is dark ; light and spirits will become it well . Heaven prosper our sport ! No man means evil but the devil , and we shall know him by his horns . Let's away ; follow me .


Master Doctor , my daughter is in green : when you see your time , take her by the hand , away with her to the deanery , and dispatch it quickly . Go before into the Park : we two must go together .

I know vat I have to do . Adieu .

Fare you well , sir .

My husband will not rejoice so much at the abuse of Falstaff , as he will chafe at the doctor's marrying my daughter : but 'tis no matter ; better a little chiding than a great deal of heart break .

Where is Nan now and her troop of fairies , and the Welsh devil , Hugh ?

They are all couched in a pit hard by Herne's oak , with obscured lights ; which , at the very instant of Falstaff's and our meeting , they will at once display to the night .

That cannot choose but amaze him .

If he be not amazed , he will be mocked ; if he be amazed , he will every way be mocked .

We'll betray him finely .

Against such lewdsters and their lechery ,
Those that betray them do no treachery .

The hour draws on : to the oak , to the oak !


Trib , trib , fairies : come ; and remember your parts . Be pold , I pray you ; follow me into the pit , and when I give the watch-ords , do as I pid you . Come , come ; trib , trib .


The Windsor bell hath struck twelve ; the minute draws on . Now , the hot-blooded gods assist me ! Remember , Jove , thou wast a bull for thy Europa ; love set on thy horns . O powerful love ! that , in some respects , makes a beast a man ; in some other , a man a beast . You were also , Jupiter , a swan for the love of Leda ; O omnipotent love ! how near the god drew to the complexion of a goose ! A fault done first in the form of a beast ; O Jove , a beastly fault ! and then another fault in the semblance of a fowl : think on 't , Jove ; a foul fault ! When gods have hot backs , what shall poor men do ? For me , I am here a Windsor stag ; and the fattest , I think , i' the forest : send me a cool rut-time , Jove , or who can blame me to piss my tallow ? Who comes here ? my doe ?


Sir John ! art thou there , my deer ? my male deer ?

My doe with the black scut ! Let the sky rain potatoes ; let it thunder to the tune of 'Green Sleeves ;' hail kissing-comfits and snow eringoes ; let there come a tempest of provocation , I will shelter me here .


Mistress Page is come with me , sweetheart .

Divide me like a brib'd buck , each a haunch : I will keep my sides to myself , my shoulders for the fellow of this walk , and my horns I bequeath your husbands . Am I a woodman , ha ? Speak I like Herne the hunter ? Why , now is Cupid a child of conscience ; he makes restitution . As I am a true spirit , welcome !


Alas ! what noise ?

Heaven forgive our sins !

What should this be ?

Away , away !

Away , away !


I think the devil will not have me damned , lest the oil that is in me should set hell on fire ; he would never else cross me thus .


Fairies , black , grey , green , and white ,
You moonshine revellers , and shades of night ,
You orphan heirs of fixed destiny ,
Attend your office and your quality .
Crier Hobgoblin , make the fairy oyes .

Elves , list your names : silence , you airy toys !
Cricket , to Windsor chimneys shalt thou leap :
Where fires thou find'st unrak'd and hearths unswept ,
There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry :
Our radiant queen hates sluts and sluttery .

They are fairies ; he that speaks to them shall die :
I'll wink and couch : no man their works must eye .


Where's Bede ? Go you , and where you find a maid 
That , ere she sleep , has thrice her prayers said ,
Rein up the organs of her fantasy ,
Sleep she as sound as careless infancy ;
But those that sleep and think not on their sins ,
Pinch them , arms , legs , backs , shoulders , sides , and shins .

About , about !
Search Windsor castle , elves , within and out :
Strew good luck , ouphs , on every sacred room ,
That it may stand till the perpetual doom ,
In state as wholesome as in state 'tis fit ,
Worthy the owner , and the owner it .
The several chairs of order look you scour 
With juice of balm and every precious flower :
Each fair instalment , coat , and several crest ,
With loyal blazon , ever more be blest !
And nightly , meadow-fairies , look you sing ,
Like to the Garter's compass , in a ring :
The expressure that it bears , green let it be ,
More fertile-fresh than all the field to see ;
And , Honi soit qui mal y pense write 
In emerald tufts , flowers purple , blue , and white ;
Like sapphire , pearl , and rich embroidery ,
Buckled below fair knighthood's bending knee :
Fairies use flowers for their charactery .
Away ! disperse ! But , till 'tis one o'clock ,
Our dance of custom round about the oak 
Of Herne the hunter , let us not forget .

Pray you , lock hand in hand ; yourselves in order set ;
And twenty glow-worms shall our lanthorns be ,
To guide our measure round about the tree .
But , stay ; I smell a man of middle-earth .

Heavens defend me from that Welsh fairy , lest he transform me to a piece of cheese !

Vile worm , thou wast o'erlook'd even in thy birth .

With trial-fire touch me his finger-end :
If he be chaste , the flame will back descend 
And turn him to no pain ; but if he start ,
It is the flesh of a corrupted heart .

A trial ! come .

Come , will this wood take fire ?


Oh , oh , oh !

Corrupt , corrupt , and tainted in desire !
About him , fairies , sing a scornful rime ;
And , as you trip , still pinch him to your time .

Fie on sinful fantasy !
Fie on lust and luxury !
Lust is but a bloody fire ,
Kindled with unchaste desire ,
Fed in heart , whose flames aspire ,
As thoughts do blow them higher and higher .
Pinch him , fairies , mutually ;
Pinch him for his villany ;
Pinch him , and burn him , and turn him about ,
Till candles and star-light and moonshine be out .


Nay , do not fly : I think we have watch'd you now :
Will none but Herne the hunter serve your turn ?

I pray you , come , hold up the jest no higher .
Now , good Sir John , how like you Windsor wives ?
See you these , husband ? do not these fair yokes 
Become the forest better than the town ?

Now sir , who's a cuckold now ? Master Brook , Falstaff's a knave , a cuckoldly knave ; here are his horns , Master Brook : and , Master Brook , he hath enjoyed nothing of Ford's but his buck-basket , his cudgel , and twenty pounds of money , which must be paid too , Master Brook ; his horses are arrested for it , Master Brook .

Sir John , we have had ill luck ; we could never meet . I will never take you for my love again , but I will always count you my deer .

I do begin to perceive that I am made an ass .

Ay , and an ox too ; both the proofs are extant .

And these are not fairies ? I was three or four times in the thought they were not fairies ; and yet the guiltiness of my mind , the sudden surprise of my powers , drove the grossness of the foppery into a received belief , in despite of the teeth of all rime and reason , that they were fairies . See now how wit may be made a Jack-a-lent , when 'tis upon ill employment !

Sir John Falstaff , serve Got , and leave your desires , and fairies will not pinse you .

Well said , fairy Hugh .

And leave you your jealousies too , I pray you .

I will never mistrust my wife again , till thou art able to woo her in good English .

Have I laid my brain in the sun and dried it , that it wants matter to prevent so gross o'er-reaching as this ? Am I ridden with a Welsh goat too ? shall I have a coxcomb of frize ? 'Tis time I were choked with a piece of toasted cheese .

Seese is not goot to give putter : your pelly is all putter .

'Seese' and 'putter !' have I lived to stand at the taunt of one that makes fritters of English ? This is enough to be the decay of lust and late-walking through the realm .

Why , Sir John , do you think , though we would have thrust virtue out of our hearts by the head and shoulders , and have given ourselves without scruple to hell , that ever the devil could have made you our delight ?

What , a hodge-pudding ? a bag of flax ?

A puffed man ?

Old , cold , withered , and of intolerable entrails ?

And one that is as slanderous as Satan ?

And as poor as Job ?

And as wicked as his wife ?

And given to fornications , and to taverns , and sack and wine and metheglins , and to drinkings and swearings and starings , pribbles and prabbles ?

Well , I am your theme : you have the start of me ; I am dejected ; I am not able to answer the Welsh flannel . Ignorance itself is a plummet o'er me : use me as you will .

Marry , sir , we'll bring you to Windsor , to one Master Brook , that you have cozened of money , to whom you should have been a pander : over and above that you have suffered , I think , to repay that money will be a biting affliction .

Nay , husband , let that go to make amends ;
Forgive that sum , and so we'll all be friends .

Well , here's my hand : all is forgiven at last .

Yet be cheerful , knight : thou shalt eat a posset to-night at my house ; where I will desire thee to laugh at my wife , that now laughs at thee . Tell her , Master Slender hath married her daughter .

Doctors doubt that : if Anne Page be my daughter , she is , by this Doctor Caius' wife .


Whoa , ho ! ho ! father Page !

Son , how now ! how now , son ! have you dispatched ?

Dispatched ! I'll make the best in Gloster-shire know on 't ; would I were hanged , la , else !

Of what , son ?

I came yonder at Eton to marry Mistress Anne Page , and she's a great lubberly boy : if it had not been i' the church , I would have swinged him , or he should have swinged me . If I did not think it had been Anne Page , would I might never stir ! and 'tis a postmaster's boy .

Upon my life , then , you took the wrong .

What need you tell me that ? I think so , when I took a boy for a girl . If I had been married to him , for all he was in woman's apparel , I would not have had him .

Why , this is your own folly . Did not I tell you how you should know my daughter by her garments ?

I went to her in white , and cried , 'mum ,' and she cried 'budget ,' as Anne and I had appointed ; and yet it was not Anne , but a postmaster's boy .

Jeshu ! Master Slender , cannot you see put marry poys ?

O I am vexed at heart : what shall I do ?

Good George , be not angry : I knew of your purpose ; turned my daughter into green ; and , indeed , she is now with the doctor at the deanery , and there married .


Vere is Mistress Page ? By gar , I am cozened : I ha' married un gar on , a boy ; un paysan , by gar , a boy ; it is not Anne Page : by gar , I am cozened .

Why , did you not take her in green ?

Ay , by gar , and 'tis a boy : by gar , I'll raise all Windsor .


This is strange . Who hath got the right Anne ?

My heart misgives me : here comes Master Fenton .

How now , Master Fenton !

Pardon , good father ! good my mother , pardon !

Now , mistress , how chance you went not with Master Slender ?

Why went you not with Master Doctor , maid ?

You do amaze her : hear the truth of it .
You would have married her most shamefully ,
Where there was no proportion held in love .
The truth is , she and I , long since contracted ,
Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us .
The offence is holy that she hath committed ,
And this deceit loses the name of craft ,
Of disobedience , or unduteous title ,
Since therein she doth evitate and shun 
A thousand irreligious cursed hours ,
Which forced marriage would have brought upon her .

Stand not amaz'd : here is no remedy :
In love the heavens themselves do guide the state :
Money buys lands , and wives are sold by fate .

I am glad , though you have ta'en a special stand to strike at me , that your arrow hath glanced .

Well , what remedy ?Fenton , heaven give thee joy !
What cannot be eschew'd must be embrac'd .

When night dogs run all sorts of deer are chas'd .

Well , I will muse no further . Master Fenton ,
Heaven give you many , many merry days !
Good husband , let us every one go home ,
And laugh this sport o'er by a country fire ;
Sir John and all .

Let it be so . Sir John ,
To Master Brook you yet shall hold your word ;
For he to-night shall lie with Mistress Ford .

THE TAMING OF THE SHREW

 
I'll pheeze you , in faith .

A pair of stocks , you rogue !

Y'are a baggage : the Slys are no rogues ; look in the chronicles ; we came in with Richard Conqueror . Therefore , paucas pallabris ; let the world slide . Sessa !

You will not pay for the glasses you have burst ?

No , not a denier . Go by , Jeronimy , go to thy cold bed , and warm thee .

I know my remedy : I must go fetch the third-borough .


Third , or fourth , or fifth borough , I'll answer him by law . I'll not budge an inch , boy : let him come , and kindly .

Huntsman , I charge thee , tender well my hounds :
Brach Merriman , the poor cur is emboss'd ,
And couple Clowder with the deep-mouth'd brach .
Saw'st thou not , boy , how Silver made it good 
At the hedge-corner , in the coldest fault ?
I would not lose the dog for twenty pound .

Why , Bellman is as good as he , my lord ;
He cried upon it at the merest loss ,
And twice to-day pick'd out the dullest scent :
Trust me , I take him for the better dog .

Thou art a fool : if Echo were as fleet ,
I would esteem him worth a dozen such .
But sup them well , and look unto them all :
To-morrow I intend to hunt again .

I will , my lord .

What's here ? one dead , or drunk ? See , doth he breathe ?

He breathes , my lord . Were he not warm'd with ale ,
This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly .

O monstrous beast ! how like a swine he lies !
Grim death , how foul and loathsome is thine image !
Sirs , I will practise on this drunken man .
What think you , if he were convey'd to bed ,
Wrapp'd in sweet clothes , rings put upon his fingers ,
A most delicious banquet by his bed ,
And brave attendants near him when he wakes ,
Would not the beggar then forget himself ?

Believe me , lord , I think he cannot choose .

It would seem strange unto him when he wak'd .

Even as a flattering dream or worthless fancy .
Then take him up and manage well the jest .
Carry him gently to my fairest chamber ,
And hang it round with all my wanton pictures ;
Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters ,
And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet .
Procure me music ready when he wakes ,
To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound ;
And if he chance to speak , be ready straight ,
And with a low submissive reverence 
Say , 'What is it your honour will command ?' 
Let one attend him with a silver basin 
Full of rose-water , and bestrew'd with flowers ;
Another bear the ewer , the third a diaper ,
And say , 'Will't please your lordship cool your hands ?' 
Some one be ready with a costly suit ,
And ask him what apparel he will wear ;
Another tell him of his hounds and horse ,
And that his lady mourns at his disease .
Persuade him that he hath been lunatic ;
And , when he says he is say that he dreams ,
For he is nothing but a mighty lord .
This do , and do it kindly , gentle sirs :
It will be pastime passing excellent ,
If it be husbanded with modesty .

My lord , I warrant you we will play our part ,
As he shall think , by our true diligence ,
He is no less than what we say he is .

Take him up gently , and to bed with him ,
And each one to his office when he wakes .

Sirrah , go see what trumpet 'tis that sounds :

Belike , some noble gentleman that means ,
Travelling some journey , to repose him here .

How now ! who is it ?

An it please your honour ,
Players that offer service to your lordship .

Bid them come near .

Now , fellows , you are welcome .

We thank your honour .

Do you intend to stay with me to-night ?

So please your lordship to accept our duty .

With all my heart . This fellow I remember ,
Since once he play'd a farmer's eldest son :
'Twas where you woo'd the gentlewoman so well .
I have forgot your name ; but , sure , that part 
Was aptly fitted and naturally perform'd .

I think 'twas Soto that your honour means .

'Tis very true : thou didst it excellent .
Well , you are come to me in happy time ,
The rather for I have some sport in hand 
Wherein your cunning can assist me much .
There is a lord will hear you play to-night ;
But I am doubtful of your modesties ,
Lest , over-eyeing of his odd behaviour ,
For yet his honour never heard a play ,
You break into some merry passion 
And so offend him ; for I tell you , sirs ,
If you should smile he grows impatient .

Fear not , my lord : we can contain ourselves 
Were he the veriest antick in the world .

Go , sirrah , take them to the buttery ,
And give them friendly welcome every one :
Let them want nothing that my house affords .

Sirrah , go you to Barthol'mew my page ,
And see him dress'd in all suits like a lady :
That done , conduct him to the drunkard's chamber ;
And call him 'madam ,' do him obeisance .
Tell him from me ,as he will win my love ,
He bear himself with honourable action ,
Such as he hath observ'd in noble ladies 
Unto their lords , by them accomplished :
Such duty to the drunkard let him do 
With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy ;
And say , 'What is't your honour will command ,
Wherein your lady and your humble wife 
May show her duty , and make known her love ?' 
And then , with kind embracements , tempting kisses ,
And with declining head into his bosom ,
Bid him shed tears , as being overjoy'd 
To see her noble lord restor'd to health ,
Who for this seven years hath esteemed him 
No better than a poor and loathsome beggar .
And if the boy have not a woman's gift 
To rain a shower of commanded tears ,
An onion will do well for such a shift ,
Which in a napkin being close convey'd ,
Shall in despite enforce a watery eye .
See this dispatch'd with all the haste thou canst :
Anon I'll give thee more instructions .

I know the boy will well usurp the grace ,
Voice , gait , and action of a gentlewoman :
I long to hear him call the drunkard husband ,
And how my men will stay themselves from laughter 
When they do homage to this simple peasant .
I'll in to counsel them : haply , my presence 
May well abate the over merry spleen 
Which otherwise would grow into extremes .


For God's sake ! a pot of small ale .

Will't please your lordship drink a cup of sack ?

Will't please your honour taste of these conserves ?

What raiment will your honour wear to-day ?

I am Christophero Sly ; call not me honour , nor lordship : I ne'er drank sack in my life ; and if you give me any conserves , give me conserves of beef . Ne'er ask me what raiment I'll wear , for I have no more doublets than backs , no more stockings than legs , nor no more shoes than feet : nay , sometime more feet than shoes , or such shoes as my toes look through the overleather .

Heaven cease this idle humour in your honour !
O , that a mighty man , of such descent ,
Of such possessions , and so high esteem ,
Should be infused with so foul a spirit !

What ! would you make me mad ? Am not I Christopher Sly , old Sly's son , of Burtonheath ; by birth a pedlar , by education a cardmaker , by transmutation a bear-herd , and now by present profession a tinker ? Ask Marian Hacket , the fat ale-wife of Wincot , if she know me not : if she say I am not fourteen pence on the score for sheer ale , score me up for the lyingest knave in Christendom . What ! I am not bestraught : here's 

O ! this it is that makes your lady mourn .

O ! this it is that makes your servants droop .

Hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house ,
As beaten hence by your strange lunacy .
O noble lord , bethink thee of thy birth ,
Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment ,
And banish hence these abject lowly dreams .
Look how thy servants do attend on thee ,
Each in his office ready at thy beck :
Wilt thou have music ? hark ! Apollo plays ,

And twenty caged nightingales do sing :
Or wilt thou sleep ? we'll have thee to a couch 
Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed 
On purpose trimm'd up for Semiramis .
Say thou wilt walk , we will bestrew the ground :
Or wilt thou ride ? thy horses shall be trapp'd ,
Their harness studded all with gold and pearl .
Dost thou love hawking ? thou hast hawks will soar 
Above the morning lark : or wilt thou hunt ?
Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them ,
And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth .

Say thou wilt course ; thy greyhounds are as swift 
As breathed stags , ay , fleeter than the roe .

Dost thou love pictures ? we will fetch thee straight 
Adonis painted by a running brook ,
And Cytherea all in sedges hid ,
Which seem to move and wanton with her breath ,
Even as the waving sedges play with wind .

We'll show thee Io as she was a maid ,
And how she was beguiled and surpris'd ,
As lively painted as the deed was done .

Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood ,
Scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds ;
And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep ,
So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn .

Thou art a lord and nothing but a lord :
Thou hast a lady far more beautiful 
Than any woman in this waning age .

And till the tears that she hath shed for thee 
Like envious floods o'er-run her lovely face ,
She was the fairest creature in the world ;
And yet she is inferior to none .

Am I a lord ? and have I such a lady ?
Or do I dream ? or have I dream'd till now ?
I do not sleep ; I see , I hear , I speak ;
I smell sweet savours , and I feel soft things :
Upon my life , I am a lord indeed ;
And not a tinker , nor Christophero Sly .
Well , bring our lady hither to our sight ;
And once again , a pot o' the smallest ale .

Will't please your mightiness to wash your hands ?

O , how we joy to see your wit restor'd !
O , that once more you knew but what you are !
These fifteen years you have been in a dream ,
Or , when you wak'd , so wak'd as if you slept .

These fifteen years ! by my fay , a goodly nap .
But did I never speak of all that time ?

O ! yes , my lord , but very idle words ;
For though you lay here in this goodly chamber ,
Yet would you say ye were beaten out of door ,
And rail upon the hostess of the house ,
And say you would present her at the leet ,
Because she brought stone jugs and no seal'd quarts .
Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket .

Ay , the woman's maid of the house .

Why , sir , you know no house , nor no such maid ,
Nor no such men as you have reckon'd up ,
As Stephen Sly , and old John Naps of Greece ,
And Peter Turf , and Henry Pimpernell ,
And twenty more such names and men as these ,
Which never were nor no man ever saw .

Now , Lord be thanked for my good amends !

Amen .

I thank thee ; thou shalt not lose by it .


How fares my noble lord ?

Marry , I fare well , for here is cheer enough .
Where is my wife ?

Here , noble lord : what is thy will with her ?

Are you my wife , and will not call me husband ?
My men should call me lord : I am your goodman .

My husband and my lord , my lord and husband ;
I am your wife in all obedience .

I know it well . What must I call her ?

Madam .

Al'ce madam , or Joan madam ?

Madam , and nothing else : so lords call ladies .

Madam wife , they say that I have dream'd 
And slept above some fifteen year or more .

Ay , and the time seems thirty unto me ,
Being all this time abandon'd from your bed .

'Tis much . Servants , leave me and her alone .
Madam , undress you , and come now to bed .

Thrice noble lord , let me entreat of you 
To pardon me yet for a night or two ,
Or , if not so , until the sun be set :
For your physicians have expressly charg'd ,
In peril to incur your former malady ,
That I should yet absent me from your bed :
I hope this reason stands for my excuse .

Ay , it stands so , that I may hardly tarry so long ; but I would be loath to fall into my dreams again : I will therefore tarry , in spite of the flesh and the blood .


Your honour's players , hearing your amendment ,
Are come to play a pleasant comedy ;
For so your doctors hold it very meet ,
Seeing too much sadness hath congeal'd your blood ,
And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy :
Therefore they thought it good you hear a play ,
And frame your mind to mirth and merriment ,
Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life .

Marry , I will ; let them play it . Is not a commonty a Christmas gambold or a tumbling-trick ?

No , my good lord ; it is more pleasing stuff .

What ! household stuff ?

It is a kind of history .

Well , we'll see't . Come , madam wife , sit by my side ,
And let the world slip : we shall ne'er be younger .


Tranio , since for the great desire I had 
To see fair Padua , nursery of arts ,
I am arriv'd for fruitful Lombardy ,
The pleasant garden of great Italy ;
And by my father's love and leave am arm'd 
With his good will and thy good company ,
My trusty servant well approv'd in all ,
Here let us breathe , and haply institute 
A course of learning and ingenious studies .
Pisa , renowned for grave citizens ,
Gave me my being and my father first ,
A merchant of great traffic through the world ,
Vincentio , come of the Bentivolii .
Vincentio's son , brought up in Florence ,
It shall become to serve all hopes conceiv'd ,
To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds :
And therefore , Tranio , for the time I study ,
Virtue and that part of philosophy 
Will I apply that treats of happiness 
By virtue specially to be achiev'd .
Tell me thy mind ; for I have Pisa left 
And am to Padua come , as he that leaves 
A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep ,
And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst .

Mi perdonate , gentle master mine ,
I am in all affected as yourself ,
Glad that you thus continue your resolve 
To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy .
Only , good master , while we do admire 
This virtue and this moral discipline ,
Let's be no stoics nor no stocks , I pray ;
Or so devote to Aristotle's checks 
As Ovid be an outcast quite abjur'd .
Balk logic with acquaintance that you have ,
And practise rhetoric in your common talk ;
Music and poesy use to quicken you ;
The mathematics and the metaphysics ,
Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you ;
No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en ;
In brief , sir , study what you most affect .

Gramercies , Tranio , well dost thou advise .
If , Biondello , thou wert come ashore ,
We could at once put us in readiness ,
And take a lodging fit to entertain 
Such friends as time in Padua shall beget .
But stay awhile : what company is this ?

Master , some show to welcome us to town .


Gentlemen , importune me no further ,
For how I firmly am resolv'd you know ;
That is , not to bestow my youngest daughter 
Before I have a husband for the elder .
If either of you both love Katharina ,
Because I know you well and love you well ,
Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure .

To cart her rather : she's too rough for me .
There , there , Hortensio , will you any wife ?

I pray you , sir , is it your will 
To make a stale of me amongst these mates ?

Mates , maid ! how mean you that ? no mates for you ,
Unless you were of gentler , milder mould .

I' faith , sir , you shall never need to fear :
I wis it is not half way to her heart ;
But if it were , doubt not her care should be 
To comb your noddle with a three-legg'd stool ,
And paint your face , and use you like a fool .

From all such devils , good Lord deliver us !

And me too , good Lord !

Hush , master ! here is some good pastime toward :
That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward .

But in the other's silence do I see 
Maid's mild behaviour and sobriety .
Peace , Tranio !

Well said , master ; mum ! and gaze your fill .

Gentlemen , that I may soon make good 
What I have said ,Bianca , get you in :
And let it not displease thee , good Bianca ,
For I will love thee ne'er the less , my girl .

A pretty peat ! it is best 
Put finger in the eye , an she knew why .

Sister , content you in my discontent .
Sir , to your pleasure humbly I subscribe :
My books and instruments shall be my company ,
On them to look and practise by myself .

Hark , Tranio ! thou mayst hear Minerva speak .

Signior Baptista , will you be so strange ?
Sorry am I that our good will effects 
Bianca's grief .

Why will you mew her up ,
Signior Baptista , for this fiend of hell ,
And make her bear the penance of her tongue ?

Gentlemen , content ye ; I am resolv'd .
Go in , Bianca .

And for I know she taketh most delight 
In music , instruments , and poetry ,
Schoolmasters will I keep within my house ,
Fit to instruct her youth . If you , Hortensio ,
Or Signior Gremio , you , know any such ,
Prefer them hither ; for to cunning men 
I will be very kind , and liberal 
To mine own children in good bringing up ;
And so , farewell . Katharina , you may stay ;
For I have more to commune with Bianca .


Why , and I trust I may go too ; may I not ?
What ! shall I be appointed hours , as though , belike ,
I knew not what to take , and what to leave ? Ha !


You may go to the devil's dam : your gifts are so good , here's none will hold you . Their love is not so great , Hortensio , but we may blow our nails together , and fast it fairly out : our cake's dough on both sides . Farewell : yet , for the love I bear my sweet Bianca , if I can by any means light on a fit man to teach her that wherein she delights , I will wish him to her father .

So will I , Signior Gremio : but a word , I pray . Though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked parle , know now , upon advice , it toucheth us both ,that we may yet again have access to our fair mistress and be happy rivals in Bianca's love ,to labour and effect one thing specially .

What's that , I pray ?

Marry , sir , to get a husband for her sister .

A husband ! a devil .

I say , a husband .

I say , a devil . Thinkest thou , Hortensio , though her father be very rich , any man is so very a fool to be married to hell ?

Tush , Gremio ! though it pass your patience and mine to endure her loud alarums , why , man , there be good fellows in the world , an a man could light on them , would take her with all faults , and money enough .

I cannot tell ; but I had as lief take her dowry with this condition , to be whipped at the high-cross every morning .

Faith , as you say , there's small choice in rotten apples . But , come ; since this bar in law makes us friends , it shall be so far forth friendly maintained , till by helping Baptista's eldest daughter to a husband , we set his youngest free for a husband , and then have to't afresh . Sweet Bianca ! Happy man be his dole ! He that runs fastest gets the ring . How say you , Signior Gremio ?

I am agreed : and would I had given him the best horse in Padua to begin his wooing , that would thoroughly woo her , wed her , and bed her , and rid the house of her . Come on .


I pray , sir , tell me , is it possible 
That love should of a sudden take such hold ?

O Tranio ! till I found it to be true ,
I never thought it possible or likely ;
But see , while idly I stood looking on ,
I found the effect of love in idleness ;
And now in plainness do confess to thee ,
That art to me as secret and as dear 
As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was ,
Tranio , I burn , I pine , I perish , Tranio ,
If I achieve not this young modest girl .
Counsel me , Tranio , for I know thou canst :
Assist me , Tranio , for I know thou wilt .

Master , it is no time to chide you now ;
Affection is not rated from the heart :
If love have touch'd you , nought remains but so ,
Redime te captum , quam queas minimo .

Gramercies , lad ; go forward : this contents :
The rest will comfort , for thy counsel's sound .

Master , you look'd so longly on the maid ,
Perhaps you mark'd not what's the pith of all .

O yes , I saw sweet beauty in her face ,
Such as the daughter of Agenor had ,
That made great Jove to humble him to her hand ,
When with his knees he kiss'd the Cretan strand .

Saw you no more ? mark'd you not how her sister 
Began to scold and raise up such a storm 
That mortal ears might hardly endure the din ?

Tranio , I saw her coral lips to move ,
And with her breath she did perfume the air ;
Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her .

Nay , then , 'tis time to stir him from his trance .
I pray , awake , sir : if you love the maid ,
Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her . Thus it stands :
Her elder sister is so curst and shrewd ,
That till the father rid his hands of her ,
Master , your love must live a maid at home ;
And therefore has he closely mew'd her up ,
Because she will not be annoy'd with suitors .

Ah , Tranio , what a cruel father's he !
But art thou not advis'd he took some care 
To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her ?

Ay , marry , am I , sir ; and now 'tis plotted .

I have it , Tranio .

Master , for my hand ,
Both our inventions meet and jump in one .

Tell me thine first .

You will be schoolmaster ,
And undertake the teaching of the maid :
That's your device .

It is : may it be done ?

Not possible ; for who shall bear your part ,
And be in Padua here Vincentio's son ?
Keep house and ply his book , welcome his friends ;
Visit his countrymen , and banquet them ?

Basta ; content thee ; for I have it full .
We have not yet been seen in any house ,
Nor can we be distinguish'd by our faces 
For man , or master : then , it follows thus :
Thou shalt be master , Tranio , in my stead ,
Keep house , and port , and servants , as I should :
I will some other be ; some Florentine ,
Some Neapolitan , or meaner man of Pisa .
'Tis hatch'd and shall be so : Tranio , at once 
Uncase thee , take my colour'd hat and cloak :
When Biondello comes , he waits on thee ;
But I will charm him first to keep his tongue .


So had you need .
In brief then , sir , sith it your pleasure is ,
And I am tied to be obedient ;
For so your father charg'd me at our parting ,
'Be serviceable to my son ,' quoth he ,
Although I think 'twas in another sense :
I am content to be Lucentio ,
Because so well I love Lucentio .

Tranio , be so , because Lucentio loves ;
And let me be a slave , to achieve that maid 
Whose sudden sight hath thrall'd my wounded eye .
Here comes the rogue .

Sirrah , where have you been ?

Where have I been ! Nay , how now ! where are you ?
Master , has my fellow Tranio stol'n your clothes ,
Or you stol'n his ? or both ? pray , what's the news ?

Sirrah , come hither : 'tis no time to jest ,
And therefore frame your manners to the time .
Your fellow Tranio , here , to save my life ,
Puts my apparel and my countenance on ,
And I for my escape have put on his ;
For in a quarrel since I came ashore 
I kill'd a man , and fear I was descried .
Wait you on him , I charge you , as becomes ,
While I make way from hence to save my life :
You understand me ?

I , sir ! ne'er a whit .

And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth :
Tranio is changed to Lucentio .

The better for him : would I were so too !

So would I , faith , boy , to have the next wish after ,
That Lucentio indeed had Baptista's youngest daughter .
But , sirrah , not for my sake , but your master's , I advise 
You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies :
When I am alone , why , then I am Tranio ;
But in all places else your master , Lucentio .

Tranio , let's go . One thing more rests , that thyself execute , to make one among these wooers : if thou ask me why , sufficeth my reasons are both good and weighty .

My lord , you nod ; you do not mind the play .

Yes , by Saint Anne , I do . A good matter , surely : comes there any more of it ?

My lord , 'tis but begun .

'Tis a very excellent piece of work , madam lady : would 'twere done !


Verona , for awhile I take my leave ,
To see my friends in Padua ; but , of all 
My best beloved and approved friend ,
Hortensio ; and I trow this is his house .
Here , sirrah Grumio ; knock , I say .

Knock , sir ! whom should I knock ? is there any man has rebused your worship ?

Villain , I say , knock me here soundly .

Knock you here , sir ! why , sir , what am I , sir , that I should knock you here , sir ?

Villain , I say , knock me at this gate ;
And rap me well , or I'll knock your knave's pate .

My master is grown quarrelsome . I should knock you first ,
And then I know after who comes by the worst .

Will it not be ?
Faith , sirrah , an you'll not knock , I'll ring it ;
I'll try how you can sol , fa , and sing it .


Help , masters , help ! my master is mad .

Now , knock when I bid you , sirrah villain !


How now ! what's the matter ? My old friend Grumio ! and my good friend Petruchio ! How do you all at Verona ?

Signior Hortensio , come you to part the fray ?
Con tutto il cuore ben trovato , may I say .

Alla nostra casa ben venuto ; molto honorato signior mio Petruchio .
Rise , Grumio , rise : we will compound this quarrel .

Nay , 'tis no matter , sir , what he 'leges in Latin . If this be not a lawful cause for me to leave his service , look you , sir , he bid me knock him and rap him soundly , sir : well , was it fit for a servant to use his master so ; being , perhaps , for aught I see , two-and-thirty , a pip out ?
Whom would to God , I had well knock'd at first ,
Then had not Grumio come by the worst .

A senseless villain ! Good Hortensio ,
I bade the rascal knock upon your gate ,
And could not get him for my heart to do it .

Knock at the gate ! O heavens ! Spake you not these words plain , 'Sirrah , knock me here , rap me here , knock me well , and knock me soundly ?' And come you now with 'knocking at the gate ?' 

Sirrah , be gone , or talk not , I advise you .

Petruchio , patience ; I am Grumio's pledge .
Why , this's a heavy chance 'twixt him and you ,
Your ancient , trusty , pleasant servant Grumio .
And tell me now , sweet friend , what happy gale 
Blows you to Padua here from old Verona ?

Such wind as scatters young men through the world 
To seek their fortunes further than at home ,
Where small experience grows . But in a few ,
Signior Hortensio , thus it stands with me :
Antonio , my father , is deceas'd ,
And I have thrust myself into this maze ,
Haply to wive and thrive as best I may .
Crowns in my purse I have and goods at home ,
And so am come abroad to see the world .

Petruchio , shall I then come roundly to thee ,
And wish thee to a shrewd ill-favour'd wife ?
Thou'dst thank me but a little for my counsel ;
And yet I'll promise thee she shall be rich ,
And very rich : but thou'rt too much my friend ,
And I'll not wish thee to her .

Signior Hortensio , 'twixt such friends as we ,
Few words suffice ; and therefore , if thou know 
One rich enough to be Petruchio's wife ,
As wealth is burden of my wooing dance ,
Be she as foul as was Florentius' love ,
As old as Sibyl , and as curst and shrewd 
As Socrates' Xanthippe , or a worse ,
She moves me not , or not removes , at least ,
Affection's edge in me , were she as rough 
As are the swelling Adriatic seas :
I come to wive it wealthily in Padua ;
If wealthily , then happily in Padua .

Nay , look you , sir , he tells you flatly what his mind is : why , give him gold enough and marry him to a puppet or an aglet-baby ; or an old trot with ne'er a tooth in her head , though she have as many diseases as two-and-fifty horses : why , nothing comes amiss , so money comes withal .

Petruchio , since we are stepp'd thus far in ,
I will continue that I broach'd in jest .
I can , Petruchio , help thee to a wife 
With wealth enough , and young and beauteous ,
Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman :
Her only fault ,and that is faults enough ,
Is , that she is intolerable curst 
And shrewd and froward , so beyond all measure ,
That , were my state far worser than it is ,
I would not wed her for a mine of gold :

Hortensio , peace ! thou know'st not gold's effect :
Tell me her father's name , and 'tis enough ;
For I will board her , though she chide as loud 
As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack .

Her father is Baptista Minola ,
An affable and courteous gentleman ;
Her name is Katharina Minola ,
Renown'd in Padua for her scolding tongue .

I know her father , though I know not her ;
And he knew my deceased father well .
I will not sleep , Hortensio , till I see her ;
And therefore let me be thus bold with you ,
To give you over at this first encounter ,
Unless you will accompany me thither .

I pray you , sir , let him go while the humour lasts . O' my word , an she knew him as well as I do , she would think scolding would do little good upon him . She may , perhaps , call him half a score knaves or so : why , that's nothing : an he begin once , he'll rail in his ropetricks . I'll tell you what , sir , an she stand him but a little , he will throw a figure in her face , and so disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see withal than a cat . You know him not , sir .

Tarry , Petruchio , I must go with thee ,
For in Baptista's keep my treasure is :
He hath the jewel of my life in hold ,
His youngest daughter , beautiful Bianca ,
And her withholds from me and other more ,
Suitors to her and rivals in my love ;
Supposing it a thing impossible ,
For those defects I have before rehears'd ,
That ever Katharina will be woo'd :
Therefore this order hath Baptista ta'en ,
That none shall have access unto Bianca ,
Till Katharine the curst have got a husband .

Katharine the curst !
A title for a maid of all titles the worst .

Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace ,
And offer me , disguis'd in sober robes ,
To old Baptista as a schoolmaster 
Well seen in music , to instruct Bianca ;
That so I may , by this device , at least 
Have leave and leisure to make love to her ,
And unsuspected court her by herself .

Here's no knavery ! See , to beguile the old folks , how the young folks lay their heads together !

Master , master , look about you : who goes there , ha ?

Peace , Grumio ! 'tis the rival of my love .
Petruchio , stand by awhile .

A proper stripling , and an amorous !

O ! very well ; I have perus'd the note .
Hark you , sir ; I'll have them very fairly bound :
All books of love , see that at any hand ,
And see you read no other lectures to her .
You understand me . Over and beside 
Signior Baptista's liberality ,
I'll mend it with a largess . Take your papers too ,
And let me have them very well perfum'd ;
For she is sweeter than perfume itself 
To whom they go to . What will you read to her ?

Whate'er I read to her , I'll plead for you ,
As for my patron , stand you so assur'd ,
As firmly as yourself were still in place ;
Yea , and perhaps with more successful words 
Than you , unless you were a scholar , sir .

O ! this learning , what a thing it is .

O ! this woodcock , what an ass it is .

Peace , sirrah !

Grumio , mum ! God save you , Signior Gremio !

And you're well met , Signior Hortensio .
Trow you whither I am going ? To Baptista Minola .
I promis'd to inquire carefully 
About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca ;
And , by good fortune , I have lighted well 
On this young man ; for learning and behaviour 
Fit for her turn ; well read in poetry 
And other books , good ones , I warrant ye .

'Tis well : and I have met a gentleman 
Hath promis'd me to help me to another ,
A fine musician to instruct our mistress :
So shall I no whit be behind in duty 
To fair Bianca , so belov'd of me .

Belov'd of me , and that my deeds shall prove .

And that his bags shall prove .

Gremio , 'tis now no time to vent our love :
Listen to me , and if you speak me fair ,
I'll tell you news indifferent good for either .
Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met ,
Upon agreement from us to his liking ,
Will undertake to woo curst Katharine ;
Yea , and to marry her , if her dowry please .

So said , so done , is well .
Hortensio , have you told him all her faults ?

I know she is an irksome , brawling scold :
If that be all , masters , I hear no harm .

No , sayst me so , friend ? What countryman ?

Born in Verona , old Antonio's son :
My father dead , my fortune lives for me ;
And I do hope good days and long to see .

O , sir , such a life , with such a wife , were strange !
But if you have a stomach , to't i' God's name :
You shall have me assisting you in all .
But will you woo this wild-cat ?

Will I live ?

Will he woo her ? ay , or I'll hang her .

Why came I hither but to that intent ?
Think you a little din can daunt mine ears ?
Have I not in my time heard lions roar ?
Have I not heard the sea , puff'd up with winds ,
Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat ?
Have I not heard great ordnance in the field ,
And heaven's artillery thunder in the skies ?
Have I not in a pitched battle heard 
Loud 'larums , neighing steeds , and trumpets' clang ?
And do you tell me of a woman's tongue ,
That gives not half so great a blow to hear 
As will a chestnut in a farmer's fire ?
Tush , tush ! fear boys with bugs .

For he fears none .

Hortensio , hark :
This gentleman is happily arriv'd ,
My mind presumes , for his own good and ours .

I promis'd we would be contributors ,
And bear his charge of wooing , whatsoe'er .

And so we will , provided that he win her .

I would I were as sure of a good dinner .


Gentlemen , God save you ! If I may be bold ,
Tell me , I beseech you , which is the readiest way 
To the house of Signior Baptista Minola ?

He that has the two fair daughters : is't he you mean ?

Even he , Biondello !

Hark you , sir ; you mean not her to 

Perhaps , him and her , sir : what have you to do ?

Not her that chides , sir , at any hand , I pray .

I love no chiders , sir . Biondello , let's away .

Well begun , Tranio .

Sir , a word ere you go :
Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of , yea or no ?

And if I be , sir , is it any offence ?

No ; if without more words you will get you hence .

Why , sir , I pray , are not the streets as free 
For me as for you ?

But so is not she .

For what reason , I beseech you ?

For this reason , if you'll know ,
That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio .

That she's the chosen of Signior Hortensio .

Softly , my masters ! if you be gentlemen ,
Do me this right ; hear me with patience .
Baptista is a noble gentleman ,
To whom my father is not all unknown ;
And were his daughter fairer than she is ,
She may more suitors have , and me for one .
Fair Leda's daughter had a thousand wooers ;
Then well one more may fair Bianca have ,
And so she shall ; Lucentio shall make one ,
Though Paris came in hope to speed alone .

What ! this gentleman will out-talk us all .

Sir , give him head : I know he'll prove a jade .

Hortensio , to what end are all these words ?

Sir , let me be so bold as ask you ,
Did you yet ever see Baptista's daughter ?

No , sir ; but hear I do that he hath two ,
The one as famous for a scolding tongue 
As is the other for beauteous modesty .

Sir , sir , the first's for me ; let her go by .

Yea , leave that labour to great Hercules ,
And let it be more than Alcides' twelve .

Sir , understand you this of me in sooth :
The youngest daughter , whom you hearken for ,
Her father keeps from all access of suitors ,
And will not promise her to any man 
Until the elder sister first be wed ;
The younger then is free , and not before .

If it be so , sir , that you are the man 
Must stead us all , and me among the rest ;
And if you break the ice , and do this feat ,
Achieve the elder , set the younger free 
For our access , whose hap shall be to have her 
Will not so graceless be to be ingrate .

Sir , you say well , and well you do conceive ;
And since you do profess to be a suitor ,
You must , as we do , gratify this gentleman ,
To whom we all rest generally beholding .

Sir , I shall not be slack : in sign whereof ,
Please ye we may contrive this afternoon ,
And quaff carouses to our mistress' health ,
And do as adversaries do in law ,
Strive mightily , but eat and drink as friends .

O excellent motion ! Fellows , let's be gone .

O excellent motion ! Fellows , let's be gone .

The motion's good indeed , and be it so :
Petruchio , I shall be your ben venuto .

Good sister , wrong me not , nor wrong yourself ,
To make a bondmaid and a slave of me ;
That I disdain : but for these other gawds ,
Unbind my hands , I'll pull them off myself ,
Yea , all my raiment , to my petticoat ;
Or what you will command me will I do ,
So well I know my duty to my elders .

Of all thy suitors , here I charge thee , tell 
Whom thou lov'st best : see thou dissemble not .

Believe me , sister , of all the men alive 
I never yet beheld that special face 
Which I could fancy more than any other .

Minion , thou liest . Is't not Hortensio ?

If you affect him , sister , here I swear 
I'll plead for you myself , but you shall have him .

O ! then , belike , you fancy riches more :
You will have Gremio to keep you fair .

Is it for him you do envy me so ?
Nay , then you jest ; and now I well perceive 
You have but jested with me all this while :
I prithee , sister Kate , untie my hands .

If that be jest , then all the rest was so .

Why , how now , dame ! whence grows this insolence ?
Bianca , stand aside . Poor girl ! she weeps .
Go ply thy needle ; meddle not with her .
For shame , thou hilding of a devilish spirit ,
Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee ?
When did she cross thee with a bitter word ?

Her silence flouts me , and I'll be reveng'd .


What ! in my sight ? Bianca , get thee in .


What ! will you not suffer me ? Nay , now I see 
She is your treasure , she must have a husband ;
I must dance bare-foot on her wedding-day ,
And , for your love to her , lead apes in hell .
Talk not to me : I will go sit and weep 
Till I can find occasion of revenge .


Was ever gentleman thus griev'd as I ?
But who comes here ?


Good morrow , neighbour Baptista .

Good morrow , neighbour Gremio . God save you , gentlemen !

And you , good sir . Pray , have you not a daughter 
Call'd Katharina , fair and virtuous ?

I have a daughter , sir , call'd Katharina .

You are too blunt : go to it orderly .

You wrong me , Signior Gremio : give me leave .
I am a gentleman of Verona , sir ,
That , hearing of her beauty and her wit ,
Her affability and bashful modesty ,
Her wondrous qualities and mild behaviour ,
Am bold to show myself a forward guest 
Within your house , to make mine eye the witness 
Of that report which I so oft have heard .
And , for an entrance to my entertainment ,
I do present you with a man of mine ,

Cunning in music and the mathematics ,
To instruct her fully in those sciences ,
Whereof I know she is not ignorant .
Accept of him , or else you do me wrong :
His name is Licio , born in Mantua .

You're welcome , sir ; and he , for your good sake .
But for my daughter Katharine , this I know ,
She is not for your turn , the more my grief .

I see you do not mean to part with her ,
Or else you like not of my company .

Mistake me not ; I speak but as I find .
Whence are you , sir ? what may I call your name ?

Petruchio is my name ; Antonio's son ;
A man well known throughout all Italy .

I know him well : you are welcome for his sake .

Saving your tale , Petruchio , I pray ,
Let us , that are poor petitioners , speak too .
Backare ! you are marvellous forward .

O , pardon me , Signior Gremio ; I would fain be doing .

I doubt it not , sir ; but you will curse your wooing .
Neighbour , this is a gift very grateful , I am sure of it . To express the like kindness myself , that have been more kindly beholding to you than any , freely give unto you this young scholar ,

that has been long studying at Rheims ; as cunning in Greek , Latin , and other languages , as the other in music and mathematics . His name is Cambio ; pray accept his service .

A thousand thanks , Signior Gremio ; welcome , good Cambio .

But , gentle sir , methinks you walk like a stranger : may I be so bold to know the cause of your coming ?

Pardon me , sir , the boldness is mine own ,
That , being a stranger in this city here ,
Do make myself a suitor to your daughter ,
Unto Bianca , fair and virtuous .
Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me ,
In the preferment of the eldest sister .
This liberty is all that I request ,
That , upon knowledge of my parentage ,
I may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo ,
And free access and favour as the rest :
And , toward the education of your daughters ,
I here bestow a simple instrument ,
And this small packet of Greek and Latin books :
If you accept them , then their worth is great .

Lucentio is your name , of whence , I pray ?

Of Pisa , sir ; son to Vincentio .

A mighty man of Pisa ; by report 
I know him well : you are very welcome , sir .


and you the set of books ;
You shall go see your pupils presently .
Holla , within !


Sirrah , lead these gentlemen 
To my two daughters , and then tell them both 
These are their tutors : bid them use them well .

We will go walk a little in the orchard ,
And then to dinner . You are passing welcome ,

And so I pray you all to think yourselves .

Signior Baptista , my business asketh haste ,
And every day I cannot come to woo .
You knew my father well , and in him me ,
Left solely heir to all his lands and goods ,
Which I have better'd rather than decreas'd :
Then tell me , if I get your daughter's love ,
What dowry shall I have with her to wife ?

After my death the one half of my lands ,
And in possession twenty thousand crowns .

And , for that dowry , I'll assure her of 
Her widowhood , be it that she survive me ,
In all my lands and leases whatsoever .
Let specialties be therefore drawn between us ,
That covenants may be kept on either hand .

Ay , when the special thing is well obtain'd ,
That is , her love ; for that is all in all .

Why , that is nothing ; for I tell you , father ,
I am as peremptory as she proud-minded ;
And where two raging fires meet together 
They do consume the thing that feeds their fury :
Though little fire grows great with little wind ,
Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all ;
So I to her , and so she yields to me ;
For I am rough and woo not like a babe .

Well mayst thou woo , and happy be thy speed !
But be thou arm'd for some unhappy words .

Ay , to the proof ; as mountains are for winds ,
That shake not , though they blow perpetually .


How now , my friend ! why dost thou look so pale ?

For fear , I promise you , if I look pale .

What , will my daughter prove a good musician ?

I think she'll sooner prove a soldier :
Iron may hold with her , but never lutes .

Why , then thou canst not break her to the lute ?

Why , no ; for she hath broke the lute to me .
I did but tell her she mistook her frets ,
And bow'd her hand to teach her fingering ;
When , with a most impatient devilish spirit ,
'Frets , call you these ?' quoth she ; 'I'll fume with them ;' 
And , with that word , she struck me on the head ,
And through the instrument my pate made way ;
And there I stood amazed for a while ,
As on a pillory , looking through the lute ;
While she did call me rascal fiddler ,
And twangling Jack ; with twenty such vile terms 
As she had studied to misuse me so .

Now , by the world , it is a lusty wench !
I love her ten times more than e'er I did :
O ! how I long to have some chat with her !

Well , go with me , and be not so discomfited :
Proceed in practice with my younger daughter ;
She's apt to learn , and thankful for good turns .
Signior Petruchio , will you go with us ,
Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you ?

I pray you do ; I will attend her here ,

And woo her with some spirit when she comes .
Say that she rail ; why then I'll tell her plain 
She sings as sweetly as a nightingale :
Say that she frown ; I'll say she looks as clear 
As morning roses newly wash'd with dew :
Say she be mute and will not speak a word ;
Then I'll commend her volubility ,
And say she uttereth piercing eloquence :
If she do bid me pack ; I'll give her thanks ,
As though she bid me stay by her a week :
If she deny to wed ; I'll crave the day 
When I shall ask the banns , and when be married .
But here she comes ; and now , Petruchio , speak .

Good morrow , Kate ; for that's your name , I hear .

Well have you heard , but something hard of hearing :
They call me Katharine that do talk of me .

You lie , in faith ; for you are call'd plain Kate ,
And bonny Kate , and sometimes Kate the curst ;
But , Kate , the prettiest Kate in Christendom ;
Kate of Kate-Hall , my super-dainty Kate ,
For dainties are all cates : and therefore , Kate ,
Take this of me , Kate of my consolation ;
Hearing thy mildness prais'd in every town ,
Thy virtues spoke of , and thy beauty sounded ,
Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs ,
Myself am mov'd to woo thee for my wife .

Mov'd ! in good time : let him that mov'd you hither 
Remove you hence . I knew you at the first ,
You were a moveable .

Why , what's a moveable ?

A joint-stool .

Thou hast hit it : come , sit on me .

Asses are made to bear , and so are you .

Women are made to bear , and so are you .

No such jade as bear you , if me you mean .

Alas ! good Kate , I will not burden thee ;
For , knowing thee to be but young and light ,

Too light for such a swain as you to catch ,
And yet as heavy as my weight should be .

Should be ! should buz !

Well ta'en , and like a buzzard .

O slow-wing'd turtle ! shall a buzzard take thee ?

Ay , for a turtle , as he takes a buzzard .

Come , come , you wasp ; i' faith you are too angry .

If I be waspish , best beware my sting .

My remedy is , then , to pluck it out .

Ay , if the fool could find it where it lies .

Who knows not where a wasp does wear his sting ?
In his tail .

In his tongue .

Whose tongue ?

Yours , if you talk of tails ; and so farewell .

What ! with my tongue in your tail ? nay , come again .
Good Kate , I am a gentleman .

That I'll try .


I swear I'll cuff you if you strike again .

So may you lose your arms :
If you strike me , you are no gentleman ;
And if no gentleman , why then no arms .

A herald , Kate ? O ! put me in thy books .

What is your crest ? a coxcomb ?

A combless cock , so Kate will be my hen .

No cock of mine ; you crow too like a craven .

Nay , come , Kate , come ; you must not look so sour .

It is my fashion when I see a crab .

Why , here's no crab , and therefore look not sour .

There is , there is .

Then show it me .

Had I a glass , I would .

What , you mean my face ?

Well aim'd of such a young one .

Now , by Saint George , I am too young for you .

Yet you are wither'd .

'Tis with cares .

I care not .

Nay , hear you , Kate : in sooth , you 'scape not so .

I chafe you , if I tarry : let me go .

No , not a whit : I find you passing gentle .
'Twas told me you were rough and coy and sullen ,
And now I find report a very liar ;
For thou art pleasant , gamesome , passing courteous ,
But slow in speech , yet sweet as spring-time flowers :
Thou canst not frown , thou canst not look askance ,
Nor bite the lip , as angry wenches will ;
Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk ;
But thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers ,
With gentle conference , soft and affable .
Why does the world report that Kate doth limp ?
O slanderous world ! Kate , like the hazel-twig ,
Is straight and slender , and as brown in hue 
As hazel nuts , and sweeter than the kernels .
O ! let me see thee walk : thou dost not halt .

Go , fool , and whom thou keep'st command .

Did ever Dian so become a grove 
As Kate this chamber with her princely gait ?
O ! be thou Dian , and let her be Kate ,
And then let Kate be chaste , and Dian sportful !

Where did you study all this goodly speech ?

It is extempore , from my mother-wit .

A witty mother ! witless else her son .

Am I not wise ?

Yes ; keep you warm .

Marry , so I mean , sweet Katharine , in thy bed :
And therefore , setting all this chat aside ,
Thus in plain terms : your father hath consented 
That you shall be my wife ; your dowry 'greed on ;
And will you , nill you , I will marry you .
Now , Kate , I am a husband for your turn ;
For , by this light , whereby I see thy beauty ,
Thy beauty that doth make me like thee well ,
Thou must be married to no man but me :
For I am he am born to tame you , Kate ;
And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate 
Conformable as other household Kates .
Here comes your father : never make denial ;
I must and will have Katharine to my wife .


Now , Signior Petruchio , how speed you with my daughter ?

How but well , sir ? how but well ?
It were impossible I should speed amiss .

Why , how now , daughter Katharine ! in your dumps ?

Call you me daughter ? now , I promise you 
You have show'd a tender fatherly regard ,
To wish me wed to one half lunatic ;
A mad-cap ruffian and a swearing Jack ,
That thinks with oaths to face the matter out .

Father , 'tis thus : yourself and all the world ,
That talk'd of her , have talk'd amiss of her :
If she be curst , it is for policy ,
For she's not froward , but modest as the dove ;
She is not hot , but temperate as the morn ;
For patience she will prove a second Grissel ,
And Roman Lucrece for her chastity ;
And to conclude , we have 'greed so well together ,
That upon Sunday is the wedding-day .

I'll see thee hang'd on Sunday first .

Hark , Petruchio : she says she'll see thee hang'd first .

Is this your speeding ? nay then , good night our part !

Be patient , gentlemen ; I choose her for myself :
If she and I be pleas'd , what's that to you ?
'Tis bargain'd 'twixt us twain , being alone ,
That she shall still be curst in company .
I tell you , 'tis incredible to believe 
How much she loves me : O ! the kindest Kate .
She hung about my neck , and kiss on kiss 
She vied so fast , protesting oath on oath ,
That in a twink she won me to her love .
O ! you are novices : 'tis a world to see ,
How tame , when men and women are alone ,
A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew .
Give me thy hand , Kate : I will unto Venice 
To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding-day .
Provide the feast , father , and bid the guests ;
I will be sure my Katharine shall be fine .

I know not what to say ; but give me your hands .
God send you joy , Petruchio ! 'tis a match .

Amen , say we : we will be witnesses .

Amen , say we : we will be witnesses .

Father , and wife , and gentlemen , adieu .
I will to Venice ; Sunday comes apace :
We will have rings , and things , and fine array ;
And , kiss me , Kate , we will be married o' Sunday .


Was ever match clapp'd up so suddenly ?

Faith , gentlemen , now I play a merchant's part ,
And venture madly on a desperate mart .

'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you :
'Twill bring you gain , or perish on the seas .

The gain I seek is , quiet in the match .

No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch .
But now , Baptista , to your younger daughter :
Now is the day we long have looked for :
I am your neighbour , and was suitor first .

And I am one that love Bianca more 
Than words can witness , or your thoughts can guess .

Youngling , thou canst not love so dear as I .

Greybeard , thy love doth freeze .

But thine doth fry .
Skipper , stand back : 'tis age that nourisheth .

But youth in ladies eyes that flourisheth .

Content you , gentlemen ; I'll compound this strife :
'Tis deeds must win the prize ; and he , of both ,
That can assure my daughter greatest dower 
Shall have my Bianca's love .
Say , Signior Gremio , what can you assure her ?

First , as you know , my house within the city 
Is richly furnished with plate and gold :
Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands ;
My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry ;
In ivory coffers I have stuff'd my crowns ;
In cypress chests my arras counterpoints ,
Costly apparel , tents , and canopies ,
Fine linen , Turkey cushions boss'd with pearl ,
Valance of Venice gold in needle-work ,
Pewter and brass , and all things that belong 
To house or housekeeping : then , at my farm 
I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail ,
Six score fat oxen standing in my stalls ,
And all things answerable to this portion .
Myself am struck in years , I must confess ;
And if I die to-morrow , this is hers ,
If whilst I live she will be only mine .

That 'only' came well in . Sir , list to me :
I am my father's heir and only son :
If I may have your daughter to my wife ,
I'll leave her houses three or four as good ,
Within rich Pisa walls , as any one 
Old Signior Gremio has in Padua ;
Besides two thousand ducats by the year 
Of fruitful land , all of which shall be her jointure .
What , have I pinch'd you , Signior Gremio ?

Two thousand ducats by the year of land !
My land amounts not to so much in all :
That she shall have ; besides an argosy 
That now is lying in Marseilles' road .
What , have I chok'd you with an argosy ?

Gremio , 'tis known my father hath no less 
Than three great argosies , besides two galliasses ,
And twelve tight galleys ; these I will assure her ,
And twice as much , whate'er thou offer'st next .

Nay , I have offer'd all , I have no more ;
And she can have no more than all I have :
If you like me , she shall have me and mine .

Why , then the maid is mine from all the world ,
By your firm promise . Gremio is out-vied .

I must confess your offer is the best ;
And , let your father make her the assurance ,
She is your own ; else , you must pardon me :
If you should die before him , where's her dower ?

That's but a cavil : he is old , I young .

And may not young men die as well as old ?

Well , gentlemen ,
I am thus resolv'd . On Sunday next , you know ,
My daughter Katharine is to be married :
Now , on the Sunday following , shall Bianca 
Be bride to you , if you make this assurance ;
If not , to Signior Gremio :
And so , I take my leave , and thank you both .

Adieu , good neighbour .

Now I fear thee not :
Sirrah young gamester , your father were a fool 
To give thee all , and in his waning age 
Set foot under thy table . Tut ! a toy !
An old Italian fox is not so kind , my boy .


A vengeance on your crafty wither'd hide !
Yet I have fac'd it with a card of ten .
'Tis in my head to do my master good :
I see no reason , but suppos'd Lucentio 
Must get a father , called 'suppos'd Vincentio ;' 
And that's a wonder : fathers , commonly 
Do get their children ; but in this case of wooing ,
A child shall get a sire , if I fail not of my cunning .

Fiddler , forbear ; you grow too forward , sir :
Have you so soon forgot the entertainment 
Her sister Katharine welcom'd you withal ?

But , wrangling pedant , this is 
The patroness of heavenly harmony :
Then give me leave to have prerogative ;
And when in music we have spent an hour ,
Your lecture shall have leisure for as much .

Preposterous ass , that never read so far 
To know the cause why music was ordain'd !
Was it not to refresh the mind of man 
After his studies or his usual pain ?
Then give me leave to read philosophy ,
And while I pause , serve in your harmony .

Sirrah , I will not bear these braves of thine .

Why , gentlemen , you do me double wrong ,
To strive for that which resteth in my choice .
I am no breeching scholar in the schools ;
I'll not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times ,
But learn my lessons as I please myself .
And , to cut off all strife , here sit we down :
Take you your instrument , play you the whiles ;
His lecture will be done ere you have tun'd .

You'll leave his lecture when I am in tune ?


That will be never : tune vour instrument .

Where left we last ?

Here , madam :

Hac ibat Simois ; hic est Sigeia tellus ;
Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis .


Construe them .

Hac ibat , as I told you before , Simois , I am Lucentio , hic est , son unto Vincentio of Pisa , Sigeia tellus , disguised thus to get your love ; Hic steterat , and that Lucentio that comes a wooing , Priami , is my man Tranio , regia , bearing my port , celsa senis , that we might beguile the old pantaloon .

Madam , my instrument's in tune .

Let's hear .

O fie ! the treble jars .

Spit in the hole , man , and tune again .

Now let me see if I can construe it : Hac ibat Simois , I know you not , hic est Sigeia tellus , I trust you not ; Hic steterat Priami , take heed he hear us not , regia , presume not ; celsa senis , despair not .

Madam , 'tis now in tune .

All but the base .

The base is right ; 'tis the base knave that jars .
How fiery and forward our pedant is !


Now , for my life , the knave doth court my love :
Pedascule , I'll watch you better yet .

In time I may believe , yet I mistrust .

Mistrust it not ; for , sure ,  acides 
Was Ajax , call'd so from his grandfather .

I must believe my master ; else , I promise you ,
I should be arguing still upon that doubt :
But let it rest . Now , Licio , to you .
Good masters , take it not unkindly , pray ,
That I have been thus pleasant with you both .

You may go walk , and give me leave a while :
My lessons make no music in three parts .

Are you so formal , sir ?

Well , I must wait ,
And watch withal ; for , but I be deceiv'd ,
Our fine musician groweth amorous .

Madam , before you touch the instrument ,
To learn the order of my fingering ,
I must begin with rudiments of art ;
To teach you gamut in a briefer sort ,
More pleasant , pithy , and effectual ,
Than hath been taught by any of my trade :
And there it is in writing , fairly drawn .

Why , I am past my gamut long ago .

Yet read the gamut of Hortensio .


'Gamut' I am , the ground of all accord ,
'A re ,' to plead Hortensio's passion ;
'B mi ,' Bianca , take him for thy lord ,
'C fa ut ,' that loves with all affection :
'D sol re ,' one clef , two notes have I :
'E la mi ,' show pity , or I die .

Call you this gamut ? tut , I like it not :
Old fashions please me best ; I am not so nice ,
To change true rules for odd inventions .


Mistress , your father prays you leave your books ,
And help to dress your sister's chamber up :
You know to-morrow is the wedding-day .

Farewell , sweet masters both : I must be gone .


Faith , mistress , then I have no cause to stay .


But I have cause to pry into this pedant :
Methinks he looks as though he were in love .
Yet if thy thoughts , Bianca , be so humble 
To cast thy wandering eyes on every stale ,
Seize thee that list : if once I find thee ranging ,
Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing .


Signior Lucentio , this is the 'pointed day 
That Katharine and Petruchio should be married ,
And yet we hear not of our son-in-law .
What will be said ? what mockery will it be 
To want the bridegroom when the priest attends 
To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage !
What says Lucentio to this shame of ours ?

No shame but mine : I must , forsooth , be forc'd 
To give my hand oppos'd against my heart 
Unto a mad-brain rudesby , full of spleen ;
Who woo'd in haste and means to wed at leisure .
I told you , I , he was a frantic fool ,
Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behaviour ;
And to be noted for a merry man ,
He'll woo a thousand , 'point the day of marriage ,
Make friends invite , and proclaim the banns ;
Yet never means to wed where he hath woo'd .
Now must the world point at poor Katharine ,
And say , 'Lo ! there is mad Petruchio's wife ,
If it would please him come and marry her .' 

Patience , good Katharine , and Baptista too .
Upon my life , Petruchio means but well ,
Whatever fortune stays him from his word :
Though he be blunt , I know him passing wise ;
Though he be merry , yet withal he's honest .

Would Katharine had never seen him though !


Go , girl : I cannot blame thee now to weep ,
For such an injury would vex a very saint ,
Much more a shrew of thy impatient humour .


Master , master ! news ! old news , and such news as you never heard of !

Is it new and old too ? how may that be ?

Why , is it not news to hear of Petruchio's coming ?

Is he come ?

Why , no , sir .

What then ?

He is coming .

When will he be here ?

When he stands where I am and sees you there .

But , say , what to thine old news ?

Why , Petruchio is coming , in a new hat and an old jerkin ; a pair of old breeches thrice turned ; a pair of boots that have been candle-cases , one buckled , another laced ; an old rusty sword ta'en out of the town-armoury , with a broken hilt , and chapeless ; with two broken points : his horse hipped with an old mothy saddle and stirrups of no kindred ; besides , possessed with the glanders and like to mose in the chine ; troubled with the lampass , infected with the fashions , full of windgalls , sped with spavins , rayed with the yellows , past cure of the fives , stark spoiled with the staggers , begnawn with the bots , swayed in the back , and shoulder-shotten ; near-legged before , and with a half-checked bit , and a head-stall of sheep's leather , which , being restrained to keep him from stumbling , hath been often burst and now repaired with knots ; one girth six times pieced , and a woman's crupper of velure , which hath two letters for her name fairly set down in studs , and here and there pieced with packthread .

Who comes with him ?

O , sir ! his lackey , for all the world caparisoned like the horse ; with a linen stock on one leg and a kersey boot-hose on the other , gartered with a red and blue list ; an old hat , and the 'humour of forty fancies' pricked in't for a feather : a monster , a very monster in apparel , and not like a Christian footboy or a gentleman's lackey .

'Tis some odd humour pricks him to this fashion ;
Yet oftentimes he goes but mean-apparell'd .

I am glad he is come , howsoe'er he comes .

Why , sir , he comes not .

Didst thou not say he comes ?

Who ? that Petruchio came ?

Ay , that Petruchio came .

No , sir ; I say his horse comes , with him on his back .

Why , that's all one .


Nay , by Saint Jamy ,
I hold you a penny ,
A horse and a man 
Is more than one ,
And yet not many .

Come , where be these gallants ? who is at home ?

You are welcome , sir .

And yet I come not well .

And yet you halt not .

Not so well apparell'd 
As I wish you were .

Were it better , I should rush in thus .
But where is Kate ? where is my lovely bride ?
How does my father ? Gentles , methinks you frown :
And wherefore gaze this goodly company ,
As if they saw some wondrous monument ,
Some comet , or unusual prodigy ?

Why , sir , you know this is your weddingday :
First were we sad , fearing you would not come ;
Now sadder , that you come so unprovided .
Fie ! doff this habit , shame to your estate ,
An eye-sore to our solemn festival .

And tell us what occasion of import 
Hath all so long detain'd you from your wife ,
And sent you hither so unlike yourself ?

Tedious it were to tell , and harsh to hear :
Sufficeth , I am come to keep my word ,
Though in some part enforced to digress ;
Which , at more leisure , I will so excuse 
As you shall well be satisfied withal .
But where is Kate ? I stay too long from her :
The morning wears , 'tis time we were at church .

See not your bride in these unreverent robes :
Go to my chamber ; put on clothes of mine .

Not I , believe me : thus I'll visit her .

But thus , I trust , you will not marry her .

Good sooth , even thus ; therefore ha' done with words :
To me she's married , not unto my clothes .
Could I repair what she will wear in me 
As I can change these poor accoutrements ,
'Twere well for Kate and better for myself .
But what a fool am I to chat with you 
When I should bid good morrow to my bride ,
And seal the title with a lovely kiss !


He hath some meaning in his mad attire .
We will persuade him , be it possible ,
To put on better ere he go to church .

I'll after him , and see the event of this .


But to her love concerneth us to add 
Her father's liking : which to bring to pass ,
As I before imparted to your worship ,
I am to get a man ,whate'er he be 
It skills not much , we'll fit him to our turn ,
And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa ,
And make assurance here in Padua ,
Of greater sums than I have promised .
So shall you quietly enjoy your hope ,
And marry sweet Bianca with consent .

Were it not that my fellow schoolmaster 
Doth watch Bianca's steps so narrowly ,
'Twere good , methinks , to steal our marriage ;
Which once perform'd , let all the world say no ,
I'll keep mine own , despite of all the world .

That by degrees we mean to look into ,
And watch our vantage in this business .
We'll over-reach the greybeard , Gremio ,
The narrow-prying father , Minola ,
The quaint musician , amorous Licio ;
All for my master's sake , Lucentio .

Signior Gremio , came you from the church ?

As willingly as e'er I came from school .

And is the bride and bridegroom coming home ?

A bridegroom say you ? 'Tis a groom indeed ,
A grumbling groom , and that the girl shall find .

Curster than she ? why , 'tis impossible .

Why , he's a devil , a devil , a very fiend .

Why , she's a devil , a devil , the devil's dam .

Tut ! she's a lamb , a dove , a fool to him .
I'll tell you , Sir Lucentio : when the priest 
Should ask , if Katharine should be his wife ,
'Ay , by gogs-wouns !' quoth he ; and swore so loud ,
That , all amaz'd , the priest let fall the book ;
And , as he stoop'd again to take it up ,
The mad-brain'd bridegroom took him such a cuff 
That down fell priest and book and book and priest :
'Now take them up ,' quoth he , 'if any list .' 

What said the wench when he arose again ?

Trembled and shook ; for why he stampt and swore ,
As if the vicar meant to cozen him .
But after many ceremonies done ,
He calls for wine : 'A health !' quoth he ; as if 
He had been aboard , carousing to his mates 
After a storm ; quaff'd off the muscadel ,
And threw the sops all in the sexton's face ;
Having no other reason 
But that his beard grew thin and hungerly ,
And seem'd to ask him sops as he was drinking .
This done , he took the bride about the neck ,
And kiss'd her lips with such a clamorous smack 
That at the parting all the church did echo :
And I , seeing this , came thence for very shame ;
And after me , I know , the rout is coming .
Such a mad marriage never was before .
Hark , hark ! I hear the minstrels play .

Gentlemen and friends , I thank you for your pains :
I know you think to dine with me to-day ,
And have prepar'd great store of wedding cheer ;
But so it is , my haste doth call me hence ,
And therefore here I mean to take my leave .

Is't possible you will away to-night ?

I must away to-day , before night come .
Make it no wonder : if you knew my business ,
You would entreat me rather go than stay .
And , honest company , I thank you all ,
That have beheld me give away myself 
To this most patient , sweet , and virtuous wife .
Dine with my father , drink a health to me ,
For I must hence ; and farewell to you all .

Let us entreat you stay till after dinner .

It may not be .

Let me entreat you .

It cannot be .

Let me entreat you .

I am content .

Are you content to stay ?

I am content you shall entreat me stay ,
But yet not stay , entreat me how you can .

Now , if you love me , stay .

Grumio , my horse !

Ay , sir , they be ready : the oats have eaten the horses .

Nay , then ,
Do what thou canst , I will not go to-day ;
No , nor to-morrow , nor till I please myself ,
The door is open , sir , there lies your way ;
You may be jogging whiles your boots are green ;
For me , I'll not be gone till I please myself .
'Tis like you'll prove a jolly surly groom ,
That take it on you at the first so roundly .

O Kate ! content thee : prithee , be not angry .

I will be angry : what hast thou to do ?
Father , be quiet ; he shall stay my leisure .

Ay , marry , sir , now it begins to work .

Gentlemen , forward to the bridal dinner :
I see a woman may be made a fool ,
If she had not a spirit to resist .

They shall go forward , Kate , at thy command .
Obey the bride , you that attend on her ;
Go to the feast , revel and domineer ,
Carouse full measure to her maidenhead ,
Be mad and merry , or go hang yourselves :
But for my bonny Kate , she must with me .
Nay , look not big , nor stamp , nor stare , nor fret ;
I will be master of what is mine own .
She is my goods , my chattels ; she is my house ,
My household stuff , my field , my barn ,
My horse , my ox , my ass , my anything ;
And here she stands , touch her whoever dare ;
I'll bring mine action on the proudest he 
That stops my way in Padua . Grumio ,
Draw forth thy weapon , we're beset with thieves ;
Rescue thy mistress , if thou be a man .
Fear not , sweet wench ; they shall not touch thee , Kate :
I'll buckler thee against a million .


Nay , let them go , a couple of quiet ones .

Went they not quickly I should die with laughing .

Of all mad matches never was the like .

Mistress , what's your opinion of your sister ?

That , being mad herself , she's madly mated .

I warrant him , Petruchio is Kated .

Neighbours and friends , though bride and bridegroom wants 
For to supply the places at the table ,
You know there wants no junkets at the feast .
Lucentio , you shall supply the bridegroom's place ,
And let Bianca take her sister's room .

Shall sweet Bianca practise how to bride it ?

She shall , Lucentio . Come , gentlemen , let's go .

Fie , fie , on all tired jades , on all mad masters , and all foul ways ! Was ever man so beaten ? was ever man so rayed ? was ever man so weary ? I am sent before to make a fire , and they are coming after to warm them . Now , were not I a little pot and soon hot , my very lips might freeze to my teeth , my tongue to the roof of my mouth , my heart in my belly , ere I should come by a fire to thaw me ; but I , with blowing the fire , shall warm myself ; for , considering the weather , a taller man than I will take cold . Holla , ho ! Curtis .


Who is that calls so coldly ?

A piece of ice : if thou doubt it , thou mayst slide from my shoulder to my heel with no greater a run but my head and my neck . A fire , good Curtis .

Is my master and his wife coming , Grumio ?

O ! ay , Curtis , ay ; and therefore fire , fire ; cast on no water .

Is she so hot a shrew as she's reported ?

She was , good Curtis , before this frost ; but , thou knowest , winter tames man , woman , and beast ; for it hath tamed my old master , and my new mistress , and myself , fellow Curtis .

Away , you three-inch-fool ! I am no beast .

Am I but three inches ? why , thy horn is a foot ; and so long am I at the least . But wilt thou make a fire , or shall I complain on thee to our mistress , whose hand ,she being now at hand ,thou shalt soon feel , to thy cold comfort , for being slow in thy hot office ?

I prithee , good Grumio , tell me , how goes the world ?

A cold world , Curtis , in every office but thine ; and therefore , fire . Do thy duty , and have thy duty , for my master and mistress are almost frozen to death .

There's fire ready ; and therefore , good Grumio , the news ?

Why , 'Jack , boy ! ho , boy !' and as much news as thou wilt .

Come , you are so full of cony-catching .

Why therefore fire : for I have caught extreme cold . Where's the cook ? is supper ready , the house trimmed , rushes strewed , cobwebs swept ; the serving-men in their new fustian , their white stockings , and every officer his wedding-garment on ? Be the Jacks fair within , the Jills fair without , and carpets laid , and everything in order ?

All ready ; and therefore , I pray thee , news ?

First , know , my horse is tired ; my master and mistress fallen out .

How ?

Out of their saddles into the dirt ; and thereby hangs a tale .

Let's ha't , good Grumio .

Lend thine ear .

Here .

There .

This is to feel a tale , not to hear a tale .

And therefore it is called a sensible tale ; and this cuff was but to knock at your ear and beseech listening . Now I begin : Imprimis , we came down a foul hill , my master riding behind my mistress ,

Both of one horse ?

What's that to thee ?

Why , a horse .

Tell thou the tale : but hadst thou not crossed me thou shouldst have heard how her horse fell , and she under her horse ; thou shouldst have heard in how miry a place , how she was bemoiled : how he left her with the horse upon her ; how he beat me because her horse stumbled ; how she waded through the dirt to pluck him off me : how he swore ; how she prayed , that never prayed before ; how I cried ; how the horses ran away ; how her bridle was burst ; how I lost my crupper ; with many things of worthy memory , which now shall die in oblivion , and thou return unexperienced to thy grave .

By this reckoning he is more shrew than she .

Ay ; and that , thou and the proudest of you all shall find when he comes home . But what talk I of this ? Call forth Nathaniel , Joseph , Nicholas , Philip , Walter , Sugarsop , and the rest : let their heads be sleekly combed , their blue coats brushed , and their garters of an indifferent knit : let them curtsy with their left legs , and not presume to touch a hair of my master's horsetail till they kiss their hands . Are they all ready ?

They are .

Call them forth .

Do you hear ? ho ! you must meet my master to countenance my mistress .

Why , she hath a face of her own .

Who knows not that ?

Thou , it seems , that callest for company to countenance her .

I call them forth to credit her .

Why , she comes to borrow nothing of them .


Welcome home , Grumio !

How now , Grumio ?

What , Grumio !

Fellow Grumio !

How now , old lad !

Welcome , you ; how now , you ; what , you ; fellow , you ; and thus much for greeting . Now , my spruce companions , is all ready , and all things neat ?

All things is ready . How near is our master ?

E'en at hand , alighted by this ; and therefore be not ,Cock's passion , silence ! I hear my master .


Where be these knaves ? What ! no man at door 
To hold my stirrup nor to take my horse ?
Where is Nathaniel , Gregory , Philip ?

Here , here , sir ; here , sir .

Here , sir ! here , sir ! here , sir ! here , sir !
You logger-headed and unpolish'd grooms !
What , no attendance ? no regard ? no duty ?
Where is the foolish knave I sent before ?

Here , sir ; as foolish as I was before .

You peasant swain ! you whoreson malt-horse drudge !
Did I not bid thee meet me in the park ,
And bring along these rascal knaves with thee ?

Nathaniel's coat , sir , was not fully made ,
And Gabriel's pumps were all unpink'd i' the heel ,
There was no link to colour Peter's hat ,
And Walter's dagger was not come from sheathing ,
There were none fine but Adam , Ralph , and Gregory ;
The rest were ragged , old , and beggarly ;
Yet , as they are , here are they come to meet you .

Go , rascals , go , and fetch my supper in .

Where is the life that late I led ?
Where are those ? Sit down , Kate , and welcome .
Soud , soud , soud , soud !


Why , when , I say ?Nay , good sweet Kate , be merry .
Off with my boots , you rogues ! you villains ! When ?

It was the friar of orders grey ,
As he forth walked on his way :

Out , you rogue ! you pluck my foot awry :

Take that , and mend the plucking off the other .
Be merry , Kate . Some water , here ; what , ho !
Where's my spaniel Troilus ? Sirrah , get you hence 
And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither :

One , Kate , that you must kiss , and be acquainted with .
Where are my slippers ? Shall I have some water ?
Come , Kate , and wash , and welcome heartily .


You whoreson villain ! will you let it fall ?

Patience , I pray you ; 'twas a fault unwilling .

A whoreson , beetle-headed , flap-ear'd knave !
Come , Kate , sit down ; I know you have a stomach .
Will you give thanks , sweet Kate , or else shall I ?
What's this ? mutton ?

Ay .

Who brought it ?

I .

'Tis burnt ; and so is all the meat .
What dogs are these ! Where is the rascal cook ?
How durst you , villains , bring it from the dresser ,
And serve it thus to me that love it not ?

There , take it to you , trenchers , cups , and all .
You heedless joltheads and unmanner'd slaves !
What ! do you grumble ? I'll be with you straight .

I pray you , husband , be not so disquiet :
The meat was well if you were so contented .

I tell thee , Kate , 'twas burnt and dried away ;
And I expressly am forbid to touch it ,
For it engenders choler , planteth anger ;
And better 'twere that both of us did fast ,
Since , of ourselves , ourselves are choleric ,
Than feed it with such over-roasted flesh .
Be patient ; to-morrow't shall be mended ,
And for this night we'll fast for company :
Come , I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber .


Peter , didst ever see the like ?

He kills her in her own humour .


Where is he ?

In her chamber , making a sermon of continency to her ;
And rails , and swears , and rates , that she , poor soul ,
Knows not which way to stand , to look , to speak ,
And sits as one new-risen from a dream .
Away , away ! for he is coming hither .

Thus have I politicly begun my reign ,
And 'tis my hope to end successfully .
My falcon now is sharp and passing empty ,
And till she stoop she must not be full-gorg'd ,
For then she never looks upon her lure .
Another way I have to man my haggard ,
To make her come and know her keeper's call ;
That is , to watch her , as we watch these kites 
That bate and beat and will not be obedient .
She eat no meat to-day , nor none shall eat ;
Last night she slept not , nor to-night she shall not :
As with the meat , some undeserved fault 
I'll find about the making of the bed ;
And here I'll fling the pillow , there the bolster ,
This way the coverlet , another way the sheets :
Ay , and amid this hurly I intend 
That all is done in reverend care of her ;
And in conclusion she shall watch all night :
And if she chance to nod I'll rail and brawl ,
And with the clamour keep her still awake .
This is a way to kill a wife with kindness ;
And thus I'll curb her mad and headstrong humour .
He that knows better how to tame a shrew ,
Now let him speak : 'tis charity to show .


Is't possible , friend Licio , that Mistress Bianca 
Doth fancy any other but Lucentio ?
I tell you , sir , she bears me fair in hand .

Sir , to satisfy you in what I have said ,
Stand by , and mark the manner of his teaching .

Now , mistress , profit you in what you read ?

What , master , read you ? first resolve me that .

I read that I profess , the Art to Love .

And may you prove , sir , master of your art !

While you , sweet dear , prove mistress of my heart .


Quick proceeders , marry ! Now , tell me , I pray ,
You that durst swear that your mistress Bianca 
Lov'd none in the world so well as Lucentio .

O despiteful love ! unconstant womankind !
I tell thee , Licio , this is wonderful .

Mistake no more : I am not Licio ,
Nor a musician , as I seem to be ;
But one that scorns to live in this disguise ,
For such a one as leaves a gentleman ,
And makes a god of such a cullion :
Know , sir , that I am call'd Hortensio .

Signior Hortensio , I have often heard 
Of your entire affection to Bianca ;
And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness ,
I will with you , if you be so contented ,
Forswear Bianca and her love for ever .

See , how they kiss and court ! Signior Lucentio ,
Here is my hand , and here I firmly vow 
Never to woo her more ; but I do forswear her ,
As one unworthy all the former favours 
That I have fondly flatter'd her withal .

And here I take the like unfeigned oath ,
Never to marry with her though she would entreat .
Fie on her ! see how beastly she doth court him .

Would all the world , but he had quite forsworn !
For me , that I may surely keep mine oath ,
I will be married to a wealthy widow 
Ere three days pass , which hath as long lov'd me 
As I have lov'd this proud disdainful haggard .
And so farewell , Signior Lucentio .
Kindness in women , not their beauteous looks ,
Shall win my love : and so I take my leave ,
In resolution as I swore before .


Mistress Bianca , bless you with such grace 
As 'longeth to a lover's blessed case !
Nay , I have ta'en you napping , gentle love ,
And have forsworn you with Hortensio .

Tranio , you jest . But have you both forsworn me ?

Mistress , we have .

Then we are rid of Licio .

I' faith , he'll have a lusty widow now , That shall be woo'd and wedded in a day .

God give him joy !

Ay , and he'll tame her .

He says so , Tranio .

Faith , he is gone unto the taming-school .

The taming-school ! what , is there such a place ?

Ay , mistress , and Petruchio is the master ;
That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long ,
To tame a shrew , and charm her chattering tongue .


O master , master ! I have watch'd so long 
That I'm dog-weary ; but at last I spied 
An ancient angel coming down the hill 
Will serve the turn .

What is he , Biondello ?

Master , a mercatante , or a pedant ,
I know not what ; but formal in apparel ,
In gait and countenance surely like a father .

And what of him , Tranio ?

If he be credulous and trust my tale ,
I'll make him glad to seem Vincentio ,
And give assurance to Baptista Minola ,
As if he were the right Vincentio .
Take in your love , and then let me alone .

God save you , sir !

And you , sir ! you are welcome .
Travel you far on , or are you at the furthest ?

Sir , at the furthest for a week or two ;
But then up further , and as far as Rome ;
And so to Tripoli , if God lend me life .

What countryman , I pray ?

Of Mantua .

Of Mantua , sir ! marry , God forbid !
And come to Padua , careless of your life ?

My life , sir ! how , I pray ? for that goes hard .

'Tis death for any one in Mantua 
To come to Padua . Know you not the cause ?
Your ships are stay'd at Venice ; and the duke ,
For private quarrel 'twixt your duke and him ,
Hath publish'd and proclaim'd it openly .
'Tis marvel , but that you are but newly come ,
You might have heard it else proclaim'd about .

Alas , sir ! it is worse for me than so ;
For I have bills for money by exchange 
From Florence , and must here deliver them .

Well , sir , to do you courtesy ,
This will I do , and this I will advise you :
First , tell me , have you ever been at Pisa ?

Ay , sir , in Pisa have I often been ;
Pisa , renowned for grave citizens .

Among them , know you one Vincentio ?

I know him not , but I have heard of him ;
A merchant of incomparable wealth .

He is my father , sir ; and , sooth to say ,
In countenance somewhat doth resemble you .

As much as an apple doth an oyster , and all one .

To save your life in this extremity ,
This favour will I do you for his sake ;
And think it not the worst of all your fortunes 
That you are like to Sir Vincentio .
His name and credit shall you undertake ,
And in my house you shall be friendly lodg'd ,
Look that you take upon you as you should !
You understand me , sir ; so shall you stay 
Till you have done your business in the city .
If this be courtesy , sir , accept of it .

O sir , I do ; and will repute you ever 
The patron of my life and liberty .

Then go with me to make the matter good .
This , by the way , I let you understand :
My father is here look'd for every day ,
To pass assurance of a dower in marriage 
'Twixt me and one Baptista's daughter here :
In all these circumstances I'll instruct you .
Go with me to clothe you as becomes you .


No , no , forsooth ; I dare not , for my life .

The more my wrong the more his spite appears .
What , did he marry me to famish me ?
Beggars , that come unto my father's door ,
Upon entreaty have a present alms ;
If not , elsewhere they meet with charity :
But I , who never knew how to entreat ,
Nor never needed that I should entreat ,
Am starv'd for meat , giddy for lack of sleep ;
With oaths kept waking , and with brawling fed .
And that which spites me more than all these wants ,
He does it under name of perfect love ;
As who should say , if I should sleep or eat 
'Twere deadly sickness , or else present death .
I prithee go and get me some repast ;
I care not what , so it be wholesome food .

What say you to a neat's foot ?

'Tis passing good : I prithee let me have it .

I fear it is too choleric a meat .
How say you to a fat tripe finely broil'd ?

I like it well : good Grumio , fetch it me .

I cannot tell ; I fear 'tis choleric .
What say you to a piece of beef and mustard ?

A dish that I do love to feed upon .

Ay , but the mustard is too hot a little .

Why , then the beef , and let the mustard rest .

Nay , then I will not : you shall have the mustard ,
Or else you get no beef of Grumio .

Then both , or one , or anything thou wilt .

Why then , the mustard without the beef .

Go , get thee gone , thou false deluding slave ,

That feed'st me with the very name of meat .
Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you ,
That triumph thus upon my misery !
Go , get thee gone , I say .


How fares my Kate ? What , sweeting , all amort ?

Mistress , what cheer ?

Faith , as cold as can be .

Pluck up thy spirits ; look cheerfully upon me .
Here , love ; thou seest how diligent I am ,
To dress thy meat myself and bring it thee :

I am sure , sweet Kate , this kindness merits thanks .
What ! not a word ? Nay then , thou lov'st it not ,
And all my pains is sorted to no proof .
Here , take away this dish .

I pray you , let it stand .

The poorest service is repaid with thanks ,
And so shall mine , before you touch the meat .

I thank you , sir .

Signior Petruchio , fie ! you are to blame .
Come , Mistress Kate , I'll bear you company .

Eat it up all , Hortensio , if thou lov'st me .
Much good do it unto thy gentle heart !
Kate , eat apace : and now , my honey love ,
Will we return unto thy father's house ,
And revel it as bravely as the best ,
With silken coats and caps and golden rings ,
With ruffs and cuffs and farthingales and things ;
With scarfs and fans and double change of bravery ,
With amber bracelets , beads and all this knavery .
What ! hast thou din'd ? The tailor stays thy leisure ,
To deck thy body with his ruffling treasure .


Come , tailor , let us see these ornaments ;
Lay forth the gown .


What news with you , sir ?

Here is the cap your worship did bespeak .

Why , this was moulded on a porringer ;
A velvet dish : fie , fie ! 'tis lewd and filthy :
Why , 'tis a cockle or a walnut-shell ,
A knack , a toy , a trick , a baby's cap :
Away with it ! come , let me have a bigger .

I'll have no bigger : this doth fit the time ,
And gentlewomen wear such caps as these .

When you are gentle , you shall have one too ;
And not till then .

That will not be in haste .

Why , sir , I trust I may have leave to speak ,
And speak I will ; I am no child , no babe :
Your betters have endur'd me say my mind ,
And if you cannot , best you stop your ears .
My tongue will tell the anger of my heart ,
Or else my heart , concealing it , will break :
And rather than it shall , I will be free 
Even to the uttermost , as I please , in words .

Why , thou sayst true ; it is a paltry cap ,
A custard-coffin , a bauble , a silken pie .
I love thee well in that thou lik'st it not .

Love me or love me not , I like the cap ,
And it I will have , or I will have none .


Thy gown ? why , ay : come , tailor , let us see't .
O mercy , God ! what masquing stuff is here ?
What's this ? a sleeve ? 'tis like a demi-cannon :
What ! up and down , carv'd like an apple-tart ?
Here's snip and nip and cut and slish and slash ,
Like to a censer in a barber's shop .
Why , what , i' devil's name , tailor , call'st thou this ?

I see , she's like to have neither cap nor gown .

You bid me make it orderly and well ,
According to the fashion and the time .

Marry , and did : but if you be remember'd ,
I did not bid you mar it to the time .
Go , hop me over every kennel home ,
For you shall hop without my custom , sir .
I'll none of it : hence ! make your best of it .

I never saw a better-fashion'd gown ,
More quaint , more pleasing , nor more commendable .
Belike you mean to make a puppet of me .

Why , true ; he means to make a puppet of thee .

She says your worship means to make a puppet of her .

O monstrous arrogance ! Thou liest , thou thread ,
Thou thimble ,
Thou yard , three-quarters , half-yard , quarter , nail !
Thou flea , thou nit , thou winter-cricket thou !
Brav'd in mine own house with a skein of thread !
Away ! thou rag , thou quantity , thou remnant ,
Or I shall so be-mete thee with thy yard 
As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou liv'st !
I tell thee , I , that thou hast marr'd her gown .

Your worship is deceiv'd : the gown is made 
Just as my master had direction .
Grumio gave order how it should be done .

I gave him no order ; I gave him the stuff .

But how did you desire it should be made ?

Marry , sir , with needle and thread .

But did you not request to have it cut ?

Thou hast faced many things .

I have .

Face not me : thou hast braved many men ; brave not me : I will neither be faced nor braved . I say unto thee , I bid thy master cut out the gown ; but I did not bid him cut it to pieces : ergo , thou liest .

Why , here is the note of the fashion to testify .

Read it .

The note lies in's throat if he say I said so .

Imprimis . A loose-bodied gown .

Master , if ever I said loose-bodied gown , sew me in the skirts of it , and beat me to death with a bottom of brown thread . I said , a gown .

Proceed .

With a small compassed cape .

I confess the cape .

With a trunk sleeve .

I confess two sleeves .

The sleeves curiously cut .

Ay , there's the villany .

Error i' the bill , sir ; error i' the bill . I commanded the sleeves should be cut out and sewed up again ; and that I'll prove upon thee , though thy little finger be armed in a thimble .

This is true that I say : an I had thee in place where thou shouldst know it .

I am for thee straight : take thou the bill , give me thy mete-yard , and spare not me .

God-a-mercy , Grumio ! then he shall have no odds .

Well , sir , in brief , the gown is not for me .

You are i' the right , sir ; 'tis for my mistress .

Go , take it up unto thy master's use .

Villain , not for thy life ! take up my mistress' gown for thy master's use !

Why , sir , what's your conceit in that ?

O , sir , the conceit is deeper than you think for .
Take up my mistress' gown to his master's use !
O , fie , fie , fie !

Hortensio , say thou wilt see the tailor paid .


Go take it hence ; be gone , and say no more .

Tailor , I'll pay thee for thy gown to-morrow :
Take no unkindness of his hasty words .
Away ! I say ; commend me to thy master .


Well , come , my Kate ; we will unto your father's ,
Even in these honest mean habiliments .
Our purses shall be proud , our garments poor :
For 'tis the mind that makes the body rich ;
And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds ,
So honour peereth in the meanest habit .
What is the jay more precious than the lark 
Because his feathers are more beautiful ?
Or is the adder better than the eel 
Because his painted skin contents the eye ?
O , no , good Kate ; neither art thou the worse 
For this poor furniture and mean array .
If thou account'st it shame , lay it on me ;
And therefore frolic : we will hence forthwith ,
To feast and sport us at thy father's house .
Go , call my men , and let us straight to him ;
And bring our horses unto Long-lane end ;
There will we mount , and thither walk on foot .
Let's see ; I think 'tis now some seven o'clock ,
And well we may come there by dinner-time .

I dare assure you , sir , 'tis almost two ;
And 'twill be supper-time ere you come there .

It shall be seven ere I go to horse .
Look , what I speak , or do , or think to do ,
You are still crossing it . Sirs , let't alone :
I will not go to-day ; and ere I do ,
It shall be what o'clock I say it is .

Why , so this gallant will command the sun .


Sir , this is the house : please it you that I call ?

Ay , what else ? and , but I be deceived ,
Signior Baptista may remember me ,
Near twenty years ago , in Genoa ,
Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus .

'Tis well ; and hold your own , in any case ,
With such austerity as 'longeth to a father .

I warrant you . But , sir , here comes your boy ;
'Twere good he were school'd .


Fear you not him . Sirrah Biondello ,
Now do your duty throughly , I advise you :
Imagine 'twere the right Vincentio .

Tut ! fear not me .

But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista ?

I told him that your father was at Venice ,
And that you look'd for him this day in Padua .

Thou'rt a tall fellow : hold thee that to drink .
Here comes Baptista . Set your countenance , sir .


Signior Baptista , you are happily met .


Sir , this is the gentleman I told you of :
I pray you , stand good father to me now ,

Give me Bianca for my patrimony .

Soft , son !
Sir , by your leave : having come to Padua 
To gather in some debts , my son Lucentio 
Made me acquainted with a weighty cause 
Of love between your daughter and himself :
And ,for the good report I hear of you ,
And for the love he beareth to your daughter ,
And she to him ,to stay him not too long ,
I am content , in a good father's care ,
To have him match'd ; and , if you please to like 
No worse than I , upon some agreement 
Me shall you find ready and willing 
With one consent to have her so bestow'd ;
For curious I cannot be with you ,
Signior Baptista , of whom I hear so well .

Sir , pardon me in what I have to say :
Your plainness and your shortness please me well .
Right true it is , your son Lucentio here 
Doth love my daughter and she loveth him ,
Or both dissemble deeply their affections :
And therefore , if you say no more than this ,
That like a father you will deal with him 
And pass my daughter a sufficient dower ,
The match is made , and all is done :
Your son shall have my daughter with consent .

I thank you , sir . Where , then , do you know best 
We be affied and such assurance ta'en 
As shall with either part's agreement stand ?

Not in my house , Lucentio ; for , you know ,
Pitchers have ears , and I have many servants .
Besides , old Gremio is hearkening still ,
And happily we might be interrupted .

Then at my lodging an it like you :
There doth my father lie , and there this night 
We'll pass the business privately and well .
Send for your daughter by your servant here ;
My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently .
The worst is this , that , at so slender warning ,
You're like to have a thin and slender pittance .

It likes me well . Cambio , hie you home ,
And bid Bianca make her ready straight ;
And , if you will , tell what hath happened :
Lucentio's father is arriv'd in Padua ,
And how she's like to be Lucentio's wife .

I pray the gods she may with all my heart !

Dally not with the gods , but get thee gone .
Signior Baptista , shall I lead the way ?
Welcome ! one mess is like to be your cheer .
Come , sir ; we will better it in Pisa .

I follow you .


Cambio !

What sayst thou , Biondello ?

You saw my master wink and laugh upon you ?

Biondello , what of that ?

Faith , nothing ; but he has left me here behind to expound the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens .

I pray thee , moralize them .

Then thus . Baptista is safe , talking with the deceiving father of a deceitful son .

And what of him ?

His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper .

And then ?

The old priest at Saint Luke's church is at your command at all hours .

And what of all this ?

I cannot tell , expect they are busied about a counterfeit assurance : take you assurance of her , cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum . To the church ! take the priest , clerk , and some sufficient honest witnesses .
If this be not that you look for , I have no more to say ,
But bid Bianca farewell for ever and a day .


Hearest thou , Biondello ?

I cannot tarry : I knew a wench married in an afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit ; and so may you , sir ; and so , adieu , sir . My master hath appointed me to go to Saint Luke's , to bid the priest be ready to come against you come with your appendix .


I may , and will , if she be so contented :
She will be pleas'd ; then wherefore should I doubt ?
Hap what hap may , I'll roundly go about her :
It shall go hard if Cambio go without her .


Come on , i' God's name ; once more toward our father's .
Good Lord , how bright and goodly shines the moon !

The moon ! the sun : it is not moonlight now .

I say it is the moon that shines so bright .

I know it is the sun that shines so bright .

Now , by my mother's son , and that's myself ,
It shall be moon , or star , or what I list ,
Or ere I journey to your father's house .
Go one and fetch our horses back again .
Evermore cross'd and cross'd ; nothing but cross'd !

Say as he says , or we shall never go .

Forward , I pray , since we have come so far ,
And be it moon , or sun , or what you please .
An if you please to call it a rush-candle ,
Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me .

I say it is the moon .

I know it is the moon .

Nay , then you lie ; it is the blessed sun .

Then God be bless'd , it is the blessed sun :
But sun it is not when you say it is not ,
And the moon changes even as your mind .
What you will have it nam'd , even that it is ;
And so , it shall be so for Katharine .

Petruchio , go thy ways ; the field is won .

Well , forward , forward ! thus the bowl should run ,
And not unluckily against the bias .
But soft ! what company is coming here ?


Good morrow , gentle mistress : where away ?
Tell me , sweet Kate , and tell me truly too ,
Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman ?
Such war of white and red within her cheeks !
What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty ,
As those two eyes become that heavenly face ?
Fair lovely maid , once more good day to thee .

Sweet Kate , embrace her for her beauty's sake .

A' will make the man mad , to make a woman of him .

Young budding virgin , fair and fresh and sweet ,
Whither away , or where is thy abode ?
Happy the parents of so fair a child ;
Happier the man , whom favourable stars 
Allot thee for his lovely bed-fellow !

Why , how now , Kate ! I hope thou art not mad :
This is a man , old , wrinkled , faded , wither'd ,
And not a maiden , as thou sayst he is .

Pardon , old father , my mistaking eyes ,
That have been so bedazzled with the sun 
That everything I look on seemeth green :
Now I perceive thou art a reverend father ;
Pardon , I pray thee , for my mad mistaking .

Do , good old grandsire ; and withal make known 
Which way thou travellest : if along with us ,
We shall be joyful of thy company .

Fair sir , and you my merry mistress ,
That with your strange encounter much amaz'd me ,
My name is called Vincentio ; my dwelling , Pisa ;
And bound I am to Padua , there to visit 
A son of mine , which long I have not seen .

What is his name ?

Lucentio , gentle sir .

Happily met ; the happier for thy son .
And now by law , as well as reverend age ,
I may entitle thee my loving father :
The sister to my wife , this gentlewoman ,
Thy son by this hath married . Wonder not ,
Nor be not griev'd : she is of good esteem ,
Her dowry wealthy , and of worthy birth ;
Beside , so qualified as may beseem 
The spouse of any noble gentleman .
Let me embrace with old Vincentio ;
And wander we to see thy honest son ,
Who will of thy arrival be full joyous .

But is this true ? or is it else your pleasure ,
Like pleasant travellers , to break a jest 
Upon the company you overtake ?

I do assure thee , father , so it is .

Come , go along , and see the truth hereof ;
For our first merriment hath made thee jealous .


Well , Petruchio , this has put me in heart .
Have to my widow ! and if she be froward ,
Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward .

Softly and swiftly , sir , for the priest is ready .

I fly , Biondello : but they may chance to need thee at home ; therefore leave us .

Nay , faith , I'll see the church o' your back ; and then come back to my master as soon as I can .


I marvel Cambio comes not all this while .


Sir , here's the door , this is Lucentio's house :
My father's bears more toward the marketplace ;
Thither must I , and here I leave you , sir .

You shall not choose but drink before you go .
I think I shall command your welcome here ,
And , by all likelihood , some cheer is toward .


They're busy within ; you were best knock louder .


What's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate ?

Is Signior Lucentio within , sir ?

He's within , sir , but not to be spoken withal .

What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two , to make merry withal ?

Keep your hundred pounds to yourself : he shall need none so long as I live .

Nay , I told you your son was well beloved in Padua . Do you hear , sir ? To leave frivolous circumstances , I pray you , tell Signior Lucentio that his father is come from Pisa , and is here at the door to speak with him .

Thou liest : his father is come from Padua , and here looking out at the window .

Art thou his father ?

Ay , sir ; so his mother says , if I may believe her .

Why , how now , gentleman ! why , this is flat knavery , to take upon you another man's name .

Lay hands on the villain : I believe , a' means to cozen somebody in this city under my countenance .


I have seen them in the church together : God send 'em good shipping ! But who is here ? mine old master , Vincentio ! now we are undone and brought to nothing .

Come hither , crack-hemp .

I hope I may choose , sir .

Come hither , you rogue . What , have you forgot me ?

Forgot you ! no , sir : I could not forget you , for I never saw you before in all my life .

What , you notorious villain ! didst thou never see thy master's father , Vincentio ?

What , my old , worshipful old master ? yes , marry , sir : see where he looks out of the window .

Is't so , indeed ?


Help , help , help ! here's a madman will murder me .


Help , son ! help , Signior Baptista !


Prithee , Kate , let's stand aside , and see the end of this controversy .

Sir , what are you that offer to beat my servant ?

What am I , sir ! nay , what are you , sir ? O immortal gods ! O fine villain ! A silken doublet ! a velvet hose ! a scarlet cloak ! and a copatain hat ! O , I am undone ! I am undone ! while I play the good husband at home , my son and my servant spend all at the university .

How now ! what's the matter ?

What , is the man lunatic ?

Sir , you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your habit , but your words show you a madman . Why , sir , what 'cerns it you if I wear pearl and gold ? I thank my good father , I am able to maintain it .

Thy father ! O villain ! he is a sailmaker in Bergamo .

You mistake , sir , you mistake , sir . Pray , what do you think is his name ?

His name ! as if I knew not his name : I have brought him up ever since he was three years old , and his name is Tranio .

Away , away , mad ass ! his name is Lucentio ; and he is mine only son , and heir to the lands of me , Signior Vincentio .

Lucentio ! O ! he hath murdered his master . Lay hold on him , I charge you in the duke's name . O my son , my son ! tell me , thou villain , where is my son Lucentio ?

Call forth an officer .

Carry this mad knave to the gaol . Father Baptista , I charge you see that he be forthcoming .

Carry me to the gaol !

Stay , officer : he shall not go to prison .

Talk not , Signior Gremio : I say he shall go to prison .

Take heed , Signior Baptista , lest you be cony-catched in this business : I dare swear this is the right Vincentio .

Swear , if thou darest .

Nay , I dare not swear it .

Then thou wert best say , that I am not Lucentio .

Yes , I know thee to be Signior Lucentio .

Away with the dotard ! to the gaol with him !

Thus strangers may be haled and abused : O monstrous villain !


O ! we are spoiled ; and yonder he is : deny him , forswear him , or else we are all undone .

Pardon , sweet father .

Lives my sweetest son ?


Pardon , dear father .

How hast thou offended ?
Where is Lucentio ?

Here's Lucentio ,
Right son to the right Vincentio ;
That have by marriage made thy daughter mine ,
While counterfeit supposes blear'd thine eyne .

Here's packing , with a witness , to deceive us all !

Where is that damned villain Tranio ,
That fac'd and brav'd me in this matter so ?

Why , tell me , is not this my Cambio ?

Cambio is chang'd into Lucentio .

Love wrought these miracles . Bianca's love 
Made me exchange my state with Tranio ,
While he did bear my countenance in the town ;
And happily I have arriv'd at last 
Unto the wished haven of my bliss .
What Tranio did , myself enforc'd him to ;
Then pardon him , sweet father , for my sake .

I'll slit the villain's nose , that would have sent me to the gaol .

But do you hear , sir ?
Have you married my daughter without asking my good will ?

Fear not , Baptista ; we will content you , go to : but I will in , to be revenged for this villany .


And I , to sound the depth of this knavery .


Look not pale , Bianca ; thy father will not frown .


My cake is dough ; but I'll in among the rest ,
Out of hope of all , but my share of the feast .

Husband , let's follow , to see the end of this ado .

First kiss me , Kate , and we will .

What ! in the midst of the street ?

What ! art thou ashamed of me ?

No , sir , God forbid ; but ashamed to kiss .

Why , then let's home again . Come , sirrah , let's away .

Nay , I will give thee a kiss : now pray thee , love , stay .

Is not this well ? Come , my sweet Kate :
Better once than never , for never too late .


At last , though long , our jarring notes agree :
And time it is , when raging war is done ,
To smile at 'scapes and perils overblown .
My fair Bianca , bid my father welcome ,
While I with self-same kindness welcome thine .
Brother Petruchio , sister Katharina ,
And thou , Hortensio , with thy loving widow ,
Feast with the best , and welcome to my house :
My banquet is to close our stomachs up ,
After our great good cheer . Pray you , sit down ;
For now we sit to chat as well as eat .


Nothing but sit and sit , and eat and eat !

Padua affords this kindness , son Petruchio .

Padua affords nothing but what is kind .

For both our sakes I would that word were true .

Now , for my life , Hortensio fears his widow .

Then never trust me , if I be afeard .

You are very sensible , and yet you miss my sense :
I mean , Hortensio is afeard of you .

He that is giddy thinks the world turns round .

Roundly replied .

Mistress , how mean you that ?

Thus I conceive by him .

Conceives by me ! How likes Hortensio that ?

My widow says , thus she conceives her tale .

Very well mended . Kiss him for that , good widow .

'He that is giddy thinks the world turns round :' 
I pray you , tell me what you meant by that .

Your husband , being troubled with a shrew ,
Measures my husband's sorrow by his woe :
And now you know my meaning .

A very mean meaning .

Right , I mean you .

And I am mean , indeed , respecting you .

To her , Kate !

To her , widow !

A hundred marks , my Kate does put her down .

That's my office .

Spoke like an officer : ha' to thee , lad .


How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks ?

Believe me , sir , they butt together well .

Head and butt ! a hasty-witted body 
Would say your head and butt were head and horn .

Ay , mistress bride , hath that awaken'd you ?

Ay , but not frighted me ; therefore I'll sleep again .

Nay , that you shall not ; since you have begun ,
Have at you for a bitter jest or two .

Am I your bird ? I mean to shift my bush ;
And then pursue me as you draw your bow .
You are welcome all .


She hath prevented me . Here , Signior Tranio ;
This bird you aim'd at , though you hit her not :
Therefore a health to all that shot and miss'd .

O sir ! Lucentio slipp'd me , like his greyhound ,
Which runs himself , and catches for his master .

A good swift simile , but something currish .

'Tis well , sir , that you hunted for yourself :
'Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay .

O ho , Petruchio ! Tranio hits you now .

I thank thee for that gird , good Tranio .

Confess , confess , hath he not hit you here ?

A' has a little gall'd me , I confess ;
And , as the jest did glance away from me ,
'Tis ten to one it maim'd you two outright .

Now , in good sadness , son Petruchio ,
I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all .

Well , I say no : and therefore , for assurance ,
Let's each one send unto his wife ;
And he whose wife is most obedient 
To come at first when he doth send for her ,
Shall win the wager which we will propose .

Content . What is the wager ?

Twenty crowns .

Twenty crowns !
I'll venture so much of my hawk or hound ,
But twenty times so much upon my wife .

A hundred then .

Content .

A match ! 'tis done .

Who shall begin ?

That will I .
Go , Biondello , bid your mistress come to me .

I go .


Son , I will be your half , Bianca comes .

I'll have no halves ; I'll bear it all myself .

How now ! what news ?

Sir , my mistress sends you word 
That she is busy and she cannot come .

How ! she is busy , and she cannot come !
Is that an answer ?

Ay , and a kind one too :
Pray God , sir , your wife send you not a worse .

I hope , better .

Sirrah Biondello , go and entreat my wife 
To come to me forthwith .


O ho ! entreat her !
Nay , then she must needs come .

I am afraid , sir ,
Do what you can , yours will not be entreated .

Now , where's my wife ?

She says you have some goodly jest in hand :
She will not come : she bids you come to her .

Worse and worse ; she will not come ! O vile ,
Intolerable , not to be endur'd !
Sirrah Grumio , go to your mistress ; say ,
I command her come to me .


I know her answer .

What ?

She will not .

The fouler fortune mine , and there an end .


Now , by my holidame , here comes Katharina !

What is your will , sir , that you send for me ?

Where is your sister , and Hortensio's wife ?

They sit conferring by the parlour fire .

Go , fetch them hither : if they deny to come ,
Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands .
Away , I say , and bring them hither straight .


Here is a wonder , if you talk of a wonder .

And so it is . I wonder what it bodes .

Marry , peace it bodes , and love , and quiet life ,
An awful rule and right supremacy ;
And , to be short , what not that's sweet and happy .

Now fair befall thee , good Petruchio !
The wager thou hast won ; and I will add 
Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns ;
Another dowry to another daughter ,
For she is chang'd , as she had never been .

Nay , I will win my wager better yet ,
And show more sign of her obedience ,
Her new-built virtue and obedience .
See where she comes , and brings your froward wives 
As prisoners to her womanly persuasion .


Katharine , that cap of yours becomes you not :
Off with that bauble , throw it under foot .

Lord ! let me never have a cause to sigh ,
Till I be brought to such a silly pass !

Fie ! what a foolish duty call you this ?

I would your duty were as foolish too :
The wisdom of your duty , fair Bianca ,
Hath cost me an hundred crowns since supper-time .

The more fool you for laying on my duty .

Katharine , I charge thee , tell these headstrong women 
What duty they do owe their lords and husbands .

Come , come , you're mocking : we will have no telling .

Come on , I say ; and first begin with her .

She shall not .

I say she shall : and first begin with her .

Fie , fie ! unknit that threatening unkind brow ,
And dart not scornful glances from those eyes ,
To wound thy lord , thy king , thy governor :
It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads ,
Confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds ,
And in no sense is meet or amiable .
A woman mov'd is like a fountain troubled ,
Muddy , ill-seeming , thick , bereft of beauty ;
And while it is so , none so dry or thirsty 
Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it .
Thy husband is thy lord , thy life , thy keeper ,
Thy head , thy sovereign ; one that cares for thee ,
And for thy maintenance commits his body 
To painful labour both by sea and land ,
To watch the night in storms , the day in cold ,
Whilst thou liest warm at home , secure and safe ;
And craves no other tribute at thy hands 
But love , fair looks , and true obedience ;
Too little payment for so great a debt .
Such duty as the subject owes the prince ,
Even such a woman oweth to her husband ;
And when she's froward , peevish , sullen , sour ,
And not obedient to his honest will ,
What is she but a foul contending rebel ,
And graceless traitor to her loving lord ?
I am asham'd that women are so simple 
To offer war where they should kneel for peace ,
Or seek for rule , supremacy , and sway ,
When they are bound to serve , love , and obey .
Why are our bodies soft , and weak , and smooth ,
Unapt to toil and trouble in the world ,
But that our soft conditions and our hearts 
Should well agree with our external parts ?
Come , come , you froward and unable worms !
My mind hath been as big as one of yours ,
My heart as great , my reason haply more ,
To bandy word for word and frown for frown ;
But now I see our lances are but straws ,
Our strength as weak , our weakness past compare ,
That seeming to be most which we indeed least are .
Then vail your stomachs , for it is no boot ,
And place your hands below your husband's foot :
In token of which duty , if he please ,
My hand is ready ; may it do him ease .

Why , there's a wench ! Come on , and kiss me , Kate .

Well , go thy ways , old lad , for thou shalt ha't .

'Tis a good hearing when children are toward .

But a harsh hearing when women are froward .

Come , Kate , we'll to bed .
We three are married , but you two are sped .
'Twas I won the wager ,

though you hit the white ;
And , being a winner , God give you good night !


Now , go thy ways ; thou hast tam'd a curst shrew .

'Tis a wonder , by your leave , she will be tam'd so .

THE TEMPEST

Boatswain !

Here , master : what cheer ?

Good , speak to the mariners : fall to't yarely , or we run ourselves aground : bestir , bestir .

Heigh , my hearts ! cheerly , cheerly , my hearts ! yare , yare ! Take in the topsail . Tend to the master's whistle .Blow , till thou burst thy wind , if room enough !


Good boatswain , have care . Where's the master ? Play the men .

I pray now , keep below .

Where is the master , boson ?

Do you not hear him ? You mar our labour : keep your cabins : you do assist the storm .

Nay , good , be patient .

When the sea is . Hence ! What cares these roarers for the name of king ? To cabin : silence ! trouble us not .

Good , yet remember whom thou hast aboard .

None that I more love than myself . You are a counsellor : if you can command these elements to silence , and work the peace of the present , we will not hand a rope more ; use your authority : if you cannot , give thanks you have lived so long , and make yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance of the hour , if it so hap .Cheerly , good hearts !Out of our way , I say .


I have great comfort from this fellow : methinks he hath no drowning mark upon him ; his complexion is perfect gallows . Stand fast , good Fate , to his hanging ! make the rope of his destiny our cable , for our own doth little advantage ! If he be not born to be hanged , our case is miserable .

Down with the topmast ! yare ! lower , lower ! Bring her to try with main-course .

A plague upon this howling ! they are louder than the weather , or our office .

Yet again ? what do you here ? Shall we give o'er , and drown ? Have you a mind to sink ?

A pox o' your throat , you bawling , blasphemous , incharitable dog !

Work you , then .

Hang , cur , hang ! you whoreson , insolent noisemaker , we are less afraid to be drowned than thou art .

I'll warrant him for drowning ; though the ship were no stronger than a nutshell , and as leaky as an unstanched wench .

Lay her a-hold , a-hold ! Set her two courses ; off to sea again ; lay her off .


All lost ! to prayers , to prayers ! all lost !


What , must our mouths be cold ?

The king and prince at prayers ! let us assist them ,
For our case is as theirs .

I am out of patience .

We are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards .
This wide-chapp'd rascal ,would thou might'st lie drowning ,
The washing of ten tides !

He'll be hang'd yet ,
Though every drop of water swear against it ,
And gape at wid'st to glut him .

'We split , we split !' 'Farewell , my wife and children !' 
'Farewell , brother !' 'We split , we split , we split !' ] 

Let's all sink wi' the king .


Let's take leave of him .


Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acre of barren ground ; long heath , brown furze , any thing . The wills above be done ! but I would fain die a dry death .


If by your art , my dearest father , you have 
Put the wild waters in this roar , allay them .
The sky , it seems , would pour down stinking pitch ,
But that the sea , mounting to th' welkin's cheek ,
Dashes the fire out . O ! I have suffer'd 
With those that I saw suffer : a brave vessel ,
Who had , no doubt , some noble creatures in her ,
Dash'd all to pieces . O ! the cry did knock 
Against my very heart . Poor souls , they perish'd .
Had I been any god of power , I would 
Have sunk the sea within the earth , or e'er 
It should the good ship so have swallow'd and 
The fraughting souls within her .

Be collected :
No more amazement . Tell your piteous heart 
There's no harm done .

O , woe the day !

No harm .
I have done nothing but in care of thee ,
Of thee , my dear one ! thee , my daughter !who 
Art ignorant of what thou art , nought knowing 
Of whence I am : nor that I am more better 
Than Prospero , master of a full poor cell ,
And thy no greater father .

More to know 
Did never meddle with my thoughts .

'Tis time 
I should inform thee further . Lend thy hand ,
And pluck my magic garment from me .So :

Lie there , my art .Wipe thou thine eyes ; have comfort .
The direful spectacle of the wrack , which touch'd 
The very virtue of compassion in thee ,
I have with such provision in mine art 
So safely order'd , that there is no soul 
No , not so much perdition as an hair ,
Betid to any creature in the vessel 
Which thou heard'st cry , which thou saw'st sink . Sit down ;
For thou must now know further .

You have often 
Begun to tell me what I am , but stopp'd ,
And left me to a bootless inquisition ,
Concluding , 'Stay ; not yet .' 

The hour's now come ,
The very minute bids thee ope thine ear ;
Obey and be attentive . Canst thou remember 
A time before we came unto this cell ?
I do not think thou canst , for then thou wast not 
Out three years old .

Certainly , sir , I can .

By what ? by any other house or person ?
Of anything the image tell me , that 
Hath kept with thy remembrance .

'Tis far off ;
And rather like a dream than an assurance 
That my remembrance warrants . Had I not 
Four or five women once that tended me ?

Thou hadst , and more , Miranda . But how is it 
That this lives in thy mind ? What seest thou else 
In the dark backward and abysm of time ?
If thou remember'st aught ere thou cam'st here ,
How thou cam'st here , thou may'st .

But that I do not .

Twelve year since , Miranda , twelve year since ,
Thy father was the Duke of Milan and 
A prince of power .

Sir , are not you my father ?

Thy mother was a piece of virtue , and 
She said thou wast my daughter ; and thy father 
Was Duke of Milan , and his only heir 
A princess ,no worse issued .

O , the heavens !
What foul play had we that we came from thence ?
Or blessed was't we did ?

Both , both , my girl :
By foul play , as thou say'st , were we heav'd thence ;
But blessedly holp hither .

O ! my heart bleeds 
To think o' the teen that I have turn'd you to ,
Which is from my remembrance . Please you , further .

My brother and thy uncle , call'd Antonio ,
I pray thee , mark me ,that a brother should 
Be so perfidious !he whom next thyself ,
Of all the world I lov'd , and to him put 
The manage of my state ; as at that time ,
Through all the signiories it was the first ,
And Prospero the prime duke ; being so reputed 
In dignity , and for the liberal arts ,
Without a parallel : those being all my study ,
The government I cast upon my brother ,
And to my state grew stranger , being transported 
And rapt in secret studies . Thy false uncle 
Dost thou attend me ?

Sir , most heedfully .

Being once perfected how to grant suits ,
How to deny them , who t'advance , and who 
To trash for over-topping ; new created 
The creatures that were mine , I say , or chang'd 'em ,
Or else new form'd 'em : having both the key 
Of officer and office , set all hearts i' the state 
To what tune pleas'd his ear ; that now he was 
The ivy which had hid my princely trunk ,
And suck'd my verdure out on't .Thou attend'st not .

O , good sir ! I do .

I pray thee , mark me .
I , thus neglecting worldly ends , all dedicated 
To closeness and the bettering of my mind 
With that , which , but by being so retir'd ,
O'erpriz'd all popular rate , in my false brother 
Awak'd an evil nature ; and my trust ,
Like a good parent , did beget of him 
A falsehood in its contrary as great 
As my trust was ; which had , indeed no limit ,
A confidence sans bound . He being thus lorded ,
Not only with what my revenue yielded ,
But what my power might else exact ,like one ,
Who having , into truth , by telling of it ,
Made such a sinner of his memory ,
To credit his own lie ,he did believe 
He was indeed the duke ; out o' the substitution ,
And executing th' outward face of royalty ,
With all prerogative :Hence his ambition growing ,
Dost thou hear ?

Your tale , sir , would cure deafness .

To have no screen between this part he play'd 
And him he play'd it for , he needs will be 
Absolute Milan . Me , poor man ,my library 
Was dukedom large enough : of temporal royalties 
He thinks me now incapable ; confederates ,
So dry he was for sway ,wi' the king of Naples 
To give him annual tribute , do him homage ;
Subject his coronet to his crown , and bend 
The dukedom , yet unbow'd ,alas , poor Milan !
To most ignoble stooping .

O the heavens !

Mark his condition and the event ; then tell me 
If this might be a brother .

I should sin 
To think but nobly of my grandmother :
Good wombs have borne bad sons .

Now the condition .
This King of Naples , being an enemy 
To me inveterate , hearkens my brother's suit ;
Which was , that he , in lieu o' the premises 
Of homage and I know not how much tribute ,
Should presently extirpate me and mine 
Out of the dukedom , and confer fair Milan ,
With all the honours on my brother : whereon ,
A treacherous army levied , one midnight 
Fated to the purpose did Antonio open 
The gates of Milan ; and , i' the dead of darkness ,
The ministers for the purpose hurried thence 
Me and thy crying self .

Alack , for pity !
I , not rememb'ring how I cried out then ,
Will cry it o'er again : it is a hint ,
That wrings mine eyes to 't .

Hear a little further ,
And then I'll bring thee to the present business 
Which now's upon us ; without the which this story 
Were most impertinent .

Wherefore did they not 
That hour destroy us ?

Well demanded , wench :
My tale provokes that question . Dear , they durst not ,
So dear the love my people bore me , nor set 
A mark so bloody on the business ; but 
With colours fairer painted their foul ends .
In few , they hurried us aboard a bark ,
Bore us some leagues to sea ; where they prepar'd 
A rotten carcass of a boat , not rigg'd ,
Nor tackle , sail , nor mast ; the very rats 
Instinctively have quit it : there they hoist us ,
To cry to the sea that roar'd to us ; to sigh 
To the winds whose pity , sighing back again ,
Did us but loving wrong .

Alack ! what trouble 
Was I then to you !

O , a cherubin 
Thou wast , that did preserve me ! Thou didst smile ,
Infused with a fortitude from heaven ,
When I have deck'd the sea with drops full salt ,
Under my burden groan'd ; which rais'd in me 
An undergoing stomach , to bear up 
Against what should ensue .

How came we ashore ?

By Providence divine .
Some food we had and some fresh water that 
A noble Neapolitan , Gonzalo ,
Out of his charity ,who being then appointed 
Master of this design ,did give us ; with 
Rich garments , linens , stuffs , and necessaries ,
Which since have steaded much ; so , of his gentleness ,
Knowing I lov'd my books , he furnish'd me ,
From mine own library with volumes that 
I prize above my dukedom .

Would I might 
But ever see that man !

Now I arise :

Sit still , and hear the last of our sea-sorrow .
Here in this island we arriv'd ; and here 
Have I , thy schoolmaster , made thee more profit 
Than other princes can , that have more time 
For vainer hours and tutors not so careful .

Heavens thank you for't ! And now , I pray you , sir ,
For still 'tis beating in my mind ,your reason 
For raising this sea-storm ?

Know thus far forth .
By accident most strange , bountiful Fortune ,
Now my dear lady , hath mine enemies 
Brought to this shore ; and by my prescience 
I find my zenith doth depend upon 
A most auspicious star , whose influence 
If now I court not but omit , my fortunes 
Will ever after droop . Here cease more questions ;
Thou art inclin'd to sleep ; 'tis a good dulness ,
And give it way ;I know thou canst not choose .

Come away , servant , come ! I'm ready now .
Approach , my Ariel ; come !


All hail , great master ! grave sir , hail ! I come 
To answer thy best pleasure ; be't to fly ,
To swim , to dive into the fire , to ride 
On the curl'd clouds : to thy strong bidding task 
Ariel and all his quality .

Hast thou , spirit ,
Perform'd to point the tempest that I bade thee ?

To every article .
I boarded the king's ship ; now on the beak ,
Now in the waist , the deck , in every cabin ,
I flam'd amazement : sometime I'd divide 
And burn in many places ; on the topmast ,
The yards , and boresprit , would I flame distinctly ,
Then meet , and join : Jove's lightnings , the precursors 
O' the dreadful thunder-claps , more momentary 
And sight-outrunning were not : the fire and cracks 
Of sulphurous roaring the most mighty Neptune 
Seem to besiege and make his bold waves tremble ,
Yea , his dread trident shake .

My brave spirit !
Who was so firm , so constant , that this coil 
Would not infect his reason ?

Not a soul 
But felt a fever of the mad and play'd 
Some tricks of desperation . All but mariners ,
Plunged in the foaming brine and quit the vessel ,
Then all a-fire with me : the king's son , Ferdinand ,
With hair up-staring ,then like reeds , not hair ,
Was the first man that leap'd ; cried , 'Hell is empty ,
And all the devils are here .' 

Why , that's my spirit !
But was not this nigh shore ?

Close by , my master .

But are they , Ariel , safe ?

Not a hair perish'd ;
On their sustaining garments not a blemish ,
But fresher than before : and , as thou bad'st me ,
In troops I have dispers'd them 'bout the isle .
The king's son have I landed by himself ;
Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs 
In an odd angle of the isle and sitting ,
His arms in this sad knot .

Of the king's ship 
The mariners , say how thou hast dispos'd ,
And all the rest o' the fleet .

Safely in harbour 
Is the king's ship ; in the deep nook , where once 
Thou call'dst me up at midnight to fetch dew 
From the still-vex'd Bermoothes ; there she's hid :
The mariners all under hatches stow'd ;
Who , with a charm join'd to their suffer'd labour ,
I have left asleep : and for the rest o' the fleet 
Which I dispers'd , they all have met again ,
And are upon the Mediterranean flote ,
Bound sadly home for Naples ,
Supposing that they saw the king's ship wrack'd ,
And his great person perish .

Ariel , thy charge 
Exactly is perform'd : but there's more work :
What is the time o' th' day ?

Past the mid season .

At least two glasses . The time 'twixt six and now 
Must by us both be spent most preciously .

Is there more toil ? Since thou dost give me pains ,
Let me remember thee what thou hast promis'd 
Which is not yet perform'd me .

How now ! moody ?
What is't thou canst demand ?

My liberty .

Before the time be out ? no more !

I prithee 
Remember , I have done thee worthy service ;
Told thee no lies , made no mistakings , serv'd 
Without or grudge or grumblings : thou didst promise 
To bate me a full year .

Dost thou forget 
From what a torment I did free thee ?

No .

Thou dost ; and think'st it much to tread the ooze 
Of the salt deep ,
To run upon the sharp wind of the north ,
To do me business in the veins o' th' earth 
When it is bak'd with frost .

I do not , sir .

Thou liest , malignant thing ! Hast thou forgot 
The foul witch Sycorax , who with age and envy 
Was grown into a hoop ? hast thou forgot her ?

No , sir .

Thou hast . Where was she born ? speak ; tell me .

Sir , in Argier .

O ! was she so ? I must ,
Once in a month , recount what thou hast been ,
Which thou forget'st . This damn'd witch , Sycorax ,
For mischiefs manifold and sorceries terrible 
To enter human hearing , from Argier ,
Thou know'st , was banish'd : for one thing she did 
They would not take her life . Is not this true ?

Ay , sir .

This blue-ey'd hag was hither brought with child 
And here was left by the sailors . Thou , my slave ,
As thou report'st thyself , wast then her servant :
And , for thou wast a spirit too delicate 
To act her earthy and abhorr'd commands ,
Refusing her grand hests , she did confine thee ,
By help of her more potent ministers ,
And in her most unmitigable rage ,
Into a cloven pine ; within which rift 
Imprison'd , thou didst painfully remain 
A dozen years ; within which space she died 
And left thee there , where thou didst vent thy groans 
As fast as mill-wheels strike . Then was this island ,
Save for the son that she did litter here ,
A freckled whelp hag-born ,not honour'd with 
A human shape .

Yes ; Caliban her son .

Dull thing , I say so ; he that Caliban ,
Whom now I keep in service . Thou best know'st 
What torment I did find thee in ; thy groans 
Did make wolves howl and penetrate the breasts 
Of ever-angry bears : it was a torment 
To lay upon the damn'd , which Sycorax 
Could not again undo ; it was mine art ,
When I arriv'd and heard thee , that made gape 
The pine , and let thee out .

I thank thee , master .

If thou more murmur'st , I will rend an oak 
And peg thee in his knotty entrails till 
Thou hast howl'd away twelve winters .

Pardon , master ;
I will be correspondent to command ,
And do my spiriting gently .

Do so ; and after two days 
I will discharge thee .

That's my noble master !
What shall I do ? say what ? what shall I do ?

Go make thyself like a nymph of the sea : be subject 
To no sight but thine and mine ; invisible 
To every eyeball else . Go , take this shape ,
And hither come in't : go , hence with diligence !

Awake , dear heart , awake ! thou hast slept well ;
Awake !

The strangeness of your story put 
Heaviness in me .

Shake it off . Come on ;
We'll visit Caliban my slave , who never 
Yields us kind answer .

'Tis a villain , sir ,
I do not love to look on .

But , as 'tis ,
We cannot miss him : he does make our fire ,
Fetch in our wood ; and serves in offices 
That profit us .What ho ! slave ! Caliban !
Thou earth , thou ! speak .

There's wood enough within .

Come forth , I say ; there's other business for thee :
Come , thou tortoise ! when ?


Fine apparition ! My quaint Ariel ,

Hark in thine ear .

My lord , it shall be done .


Thou poisonous slave , got by the devil himself 
Upon thy wicked dam , come forth !


As wicked dew as e'er my mother brush'd 
With raven's feather from unwholesome fen 
Drop on you both ! a south-west blow on ye ,
And blister you all o'er !

For this , be sure , to-night thou shalt have cramps ,
Side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up ; urchins 
Shall forth at vast of night , that they may work 
All exercise on thee : thou shalt be pinch'd 
As thick as honeycomb , each pinch more stinging 
Than bees that made them .

I must eat my dinner .
This island's mine , by Sycorax my mother ,
Which thou tak'st from me . When thou camest first ,
Thou strok'dst me , and mad'st much of me ; wouldst give me 
Water with berries in't ; and teach me how 
To name the bigger light , and how the less ,
That burn by day and night : and then I lov'd thee 
And show'd thee all the qualities o' th' isle ,
The fresh springs , brine-pits , barren place , and fertile .
Cursed be I that did so !All the charms 
Of Sycorax , toads , beetles , bats , light on you !
For I am all the subjects that you have ,
Which first was mine own king ; and here you sty me 
In this hard rock , whiles you do keep from me 
The rest o' th' island .

Thou most lying slave ,
Whom stripes may move , not kindness ! I have us'd thee ,
Filth as thou art , with human care ; and lodg'd thee 
In mine own cell , till thou didst seek to violate 
The honour of my child .

Oh ho ! Oh ho !would it had been done !
Thou didst prevent me ; I had peopled else 
This isle with Calibans .

Abhorred slave ,
Which any print of goodness will not take ,
Being capable of all ill ! I pitied thee ,
Took pains to make thee speak , taught thee each hour 
One thing or other : when thou didst not , savage ,
Know thine own meaning , but wouldst gabble like 
A thing most brutish , I endow'd thy purposes 
With words that made them known : but thy vile race ,
Though thou didst learn , had that in't which good natures 
Could not abide to be with ; therefore wast thou 
Deservedly confin'd into this rock ,
Who hadst deserv'd more than a prison .

You taught me language : and my profit on't 
Is , I know how to curse : the red plague rid you ,
For learning me your language !

Hag-seed , hence !
Fetch us in fuel ; and be quick , thou'rt best ,
To answer other business . Shrug'st thou , malice ?
If thou neglect'st , or dost unwillingly 
What I command , I'll rack thee with old cramps ,
Fill all thy bones with aches ; make thee roar ,
That beasts shall tremble at thy din .

No , pray thee !


I must obey : his art is of such power ,
It would control my dam's god , Setebos ,
And make a vassal of him .

So , slave ; hence !

Come unto these yellow sands ,
And then take hands :
Curtsied when you have , and kiss'd ,
The wild waves whist ,
Foot it featly here and there ;
And , sweet sprites , the burden bear .
Hark , hark !

The watch-dogs bark :

Hark , hark ! I hear 
The strain of strutting Chanticleer 

Where should this music be ? i' th' air , or th' earth ?
It sounds no more ;and sure , it waits upon 
Some god o' th' island . Sitting on a bank ,
Weeping again the king my father's wrack ,
This music crept by me upon the waters ,
Allaying both their fury , and my passion ,
With its sweet air : thence I have follow'd it ,
Or it hath drawn me rather ,but 'tis gone .
No , it begins again .

Full fathom five thy father lies ;
Of his bones are coral made 
Those are pearls that were his eyes :
Nothing of him that doth fade ,
But doth suffer a sea-change 
Into something rich and strange .
Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell :

Hark ! now I hear them ,ding-dong , bell .


The ditty does remember my drown'd father .
This is no mortal business , nor no sound 
That the earth owes :I hear it now above me .

The fringed curtains of thine eye advance ,
And say what thou seest yond .

What is't ? a spirit ?
Lord , how it looks about ! Believe me , sir ,
It carries a brave form :but 'tis a spirit .

No , wench ; it eats and sleeps , and hath such senses 
As we have , such ; this gallant which thou see'st ,
Was in the wrack ; and , but he's something stain'd 
With grief ,that's beauty's canker ,thou might'st call him 
A goodly person : he hath lost his fellows 
And strays about to find 'em .

I might call him 
A thing divine ; for nothing natural 
I ever saw so noble .

It goes on , I see ,
As my soul prompts it .Spirit , fine spirit ! I'll free thee 
Within two days for this .

Most sure , the goddess 
On whom these airs attend !Vouchsafe , my prayer 
May know if you remain upon this island ;
And that you will some good instruction give 
How I may bear me here : my prime request ,
Which I do last pronounce , is ,O you wonder !
If you be maid or no ?

No wonder , sir ;
But certainly a maid .

My language ! heavens !
I am the best of them that speak this speech ,
Were I but where 'tis spoken .

How ! the best ?
What wert thou , if the King of Naples heard thee ?

A single thing , as I am now , that wonders 
To hear thee speak of Naples . He does hear me ;
And , that he does , I weep : myself am Naples ,
Who with mine eyes ,ne'er since at ebb ,beheld 
The king , my father wrack'd .

Alack , for mercy !

Yes , faith , and all his lords ; the Duke of Milan ,
And his brave son being twain .

The Duke of Milan ,
And his more braver daughter could control thee ,
If now 'twere fit to do't .At the first sight 

They have changed eyes :delicate Ariel ,
I'll set thee free for this !

A word , good sir ;
I fear you have done yourself some wrong : a word .

Why speaks my father so ungently ? This 
Is the third man that e'er I saw ; the first 
That e'er I sigh'd for : pity move my father 
To be inclin'd my way !

O ! if a virgin ,
And your affection not gone forth , I'll make you 
The Queen of Naples .

Soft , sir : one word more 


They are both in either's powers : but this swift business 
I must uneasy make , lest too light winning 
Make the prize light .

One word more : I charge thee 
That thou attend me . Thou dost here usurp 
The name thou ow'st not ; and hast put thyself 
Upon this island as a spy , to win it 
From me , the lord on't .

No , as I am a man .

There's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple :
If the ill spirit have so fair a house ,
Good things will strive to dwell with't .

Follow me .


Come ;
I'll manacle thy neck and feet together :
Sea-water shalt thou drink ; thy food shall be 
The fresh-brook muscles , wither'd roots and husks 
Wherein the acorn cradled . Follow .

No ;
I will resist such entertainment till 
Mine enemy has more power .


O dear father !
Make not too rash a trial of him , for 
He's gentle , and not fearful .

What ! I say ,
My foot my tutor ?Put thy sword up , traitor ;
Who mak'st a show , but dar'st not strike , thy conscience 
Is so possess'd with guilt : come from thy ward ,
For I can here disarm thee with this stick 
And make thy weapon drop .

Beseech you , father !

Hence ! hang not on my garments .

Sir , have pity :
I'll be his surety .

Silence ! one word more 
Shall make me chide thee , if not hate thee . What !
An advocate for an impostor ? hush !
Thou think'st there is no more such shapes as he ,
Having seen but him and Caliban : foolish wench !
To the most of men this is a Caliban 
And they to him are angels .

My affections 
Are then most humble ; I have no ambition 
To see a goodlier man .

Come on ; obey :
Thy nerves are in their infancy again ,
And have no vigour in them .

So they are :
My spirits , as in a dream , are all bound up .
My father's loss , the weakness which I feel ,
The wrack of all my friends , or this man's threats ,
To whom I am subdued , are but light to me ,
Might I but through my prison once a day 
Behold this maid : all corners else o' th' earth 
Let liberty make use of ; space enough 
Have I in such a prison .

Come on .
Thou hast done well , fine Ariel !

Follow me .


Hark , what thou else shalt do me .

Be of comfort ;
My father's of a better nature , sir ,
Than he appears by speech : this is unwonted ,
Which now came from him .

Thou shalt be as free 
As mountain winds ; but then exactly do 
All points of my command .

To the syllable .

Come , follow .Speak not for him .

Beseech you , sir , be merry : you have cause ,
So have we all , of joy ; for our escape 
Is much beyond our loss . Our hint of woe 
Is common : every day some sailor's wife ,
The masters of some merchant and the merchant ,
Have just our theme of woe ; but for the miracle ,
I mean our preservation , few in millions 
Can speak like us : then wisely , good sir , weigh 
Our sorrow with our comfort .

Prithee , peace .

He receives comfort like cold porridge .

The visitor will not give him o'er so .

Look , he's winding up the watch of his wit ; by and by it will strike .

Sir ,

One : tell .

When every grief is entertain'd that's offer'd ,
Comes to the entertainer 

A dollar .

Dolour comes to him , indeed : you have spoken truer than you purposed .

You have taken it wiselier than I meant you should .

Therefore , my lord ,

Fie , what a spendthrift is he of his tongue !

I prithee , spare .

Well , I have done : but yet 

He will be talking .

Which , of he or Adrian , for a good wager , first begins to crow ?

The old cock .

The cockerel .

Done . The wager ?

A laughter .

A match !

Though this island seem to be desert ,

Ha , ha , ha ! So you're paid .

Uninhabitable , and almost inaccessible ,

Yet 

Yet 

He could not miss it .

It must needs be of subtle , tender , and delicate temperance .

Temperance was a delicate wench .

Ay , and a subtle ; as he most learnedly delivered .

The air breathes upon us here most sweetly .

As if it had lungs , and rotten ones .

Or as 'twere perfumed by a fen .

Here is everything advantageous to life .

True ; save means to live .

Of that there's none , or little .

How lush and lusty the grass looks ! how green !

The ground indeed is tawny .

With an eye of green in't .

He misses not much .

No ; he doth but mistake the truth totally .

But the rarity of it is ,which is indeed almost beyond credit ,

As many vouch'd rarities are .

That our garments , being , as they were , drenched in the sea , hold notwithstanding their freshness and glosses ; being rather new-dyed than stain'd with salt water .

If but one of his pockets could speak , would it not say he lies ?

Ay , or very falsely pocket up his report .

Methinks , our garments are now as fresh as when we put them on first in Afric , at the marriage of the king's fair daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis .

'Twas a sweet marriage , and we prosper well in our return .

Tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to their queen .

Not since widow Dido's time .

Widow ! a pox o' that ! How came that widow in ? Widow Dido !

What if he had said , widower  neas too ? Good Lord , how you take it !

Widow Dido , said you ? you make me study of that : she was of Carthage , not of Tunis .

This Tunis , sir , was Carthage .

Carthage ?

I assure you , Carthage .

His word is more than the miraculous harp .

He hath rais'd the wall , and houses too .

What impossible matter will he make easy next ?

I think he will carry this island home in his pocket , and give it his son for an apple .

And , sowing the kernels of it in the sea , bring forth more islands .

Ay ?

Why , in good time .

Sir , we were talking that our garments seem now as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage of your daughter , who is now queen .

And the rarest that e'er came there .

Bate , I beseech you , widow Dido .

O ! widow Dido ; ay , widow Dido .

Is not , sir , my doublet as fresh as the first day I wore it ? I mean , in a sort .

That sort was well fish'd for .

When I wore it at your daughter's marriage ?

You cram these words into mine ears , against 
The stomach of my sense . Would I had never 
Married my daughter there ! for , coming thence ,
My son is lost ; and , in my rate , she too ,
Who is so far from Italy remov'd ,
I ne'er again shall see her . O thou , mine heir 
Of Naples and of Milan ! what strange fish 
Hath made his meal on thee ?

Sir , he may live :
I saw him beat the surges under him ,
And ride upon their backs : he trod the water ,
Whose enmity he flung aside , and breasted 
The surge most swoln that met him : his bold head 
'Bove the contentious waves he kept , and oar'd 
Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke 
To the shore , that o'er his wave-worn basis bow'd ,
As stooping to relieve him . I not doubt 
He came alive to land .

No , no ; he's gone .

Sir , you may thank yourself for this great loss ,
That would not bless our Europe with your daughter ,
But rather lose her to an African ;
Where she at least is banish'd from your eye ,
Who hath cause to wet the grief on't .

Prithee , peace .

You were kneel'd to and importun'd otherwise 
By all of us ; and the fair soul herself 
Weigh'd between loathness and obedience , at 
Which end o' the beam should bow . We have lost your son ,
I fear , for ever : Milan and Naples have 
More widows in them of this business' making ,
Than we bring men to comfort them : the fault's 
Your own .

So is the dearest of the loss .

My lord Sebastian ,
The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness 
And time to speak it in ; you rub the sore ,
When you should bring the plaster .

Very well .

And most chirurgeonly .

It is foul weather in us all , good sir ,
When you are cloudy .

Foul weather ?

Very foul .

Had I plantation of this isle , my lord ,

He'd sow't with nettle-seed .

Or docks , or mallows .

'And were the king on't , what would I do ?

'Scape being drunk for want of wine .

I' the commonwealth I would by contraries 
Execute all things ; for no kind of traffic 
Would I admit ; no name of magistrate ;
Letters should not be known ; riches , poverty ,
And use of service , none ; contract , succession ,
Bourn , bound of land , tilth , vineyard , none ;
No use of metal , corn , or wine , or oil ;
No occupation ; all men idle , all ;
And women too , but innocent and pure ;
No sovereignty ,

Yet he would be king on't .

The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the beginning .

All things in common nature should produce 
Without sweat or endeavour : treason , felony ,
Sword , pike , knife , gun , or need of any engine ,
Would I not have ; but nature should bring forth ,
Of its own kind , all foison , all abundance ,
To feed my innocent people .

No marrying 'mong his subjects ?

None , man ; all idle ; whores and knaves .

I would with such perfection govern , sir ,
To excel the golden age 

Save his majesty !

Long live Gonzalo !

And ,do you mark me , sir ?

Prithee , no more : thou dost talk nothing to me .

I do well believe your highness ; and did it to minister occasion to these gentlemen , who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that they always use to laugh at nothing .

'Twas you we laugh'd at .

Who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing to you ; so you may continue and laugh at nothing still .

What a blow was there given !

An it had not fallen flat-long .

You are gentlemen of brave mettle : you would lift the moon out of her sphere , if she would continue in it five weeks without changing .


We would so , and then go a-bat-fowling .

Nay , good my lord , be not angry .

No , I warrant you ; I will not adventure my discretion so weakly . Will you laugh me asleep , for I am very heavy ?

Go sleep , and hear us .


What ! all so soon asleep ! I wish mine eyes 
Would , with themselves , shut up my thoughts : I find 
They are inclin'd to do so .

Please you , sir ,
Do not omit the heavy offer of it :
It seldom visits sorrow ; when it doth 
It is a comforter .

We two , my lord ,
Will guard your person while you take your rest ,
And watch your safety .

Thank you . Wondrous heavy .


What a strange drowsiness possesses them !

It is the quality o' the climate .

Why 
Doth it not then our eyelids sink ? I find not 
Myself dispos'd to sleep .

Nor I : my spirits are nimble .
They fell together all , as by consent ;
They dropp'd , as by a thunder-stroke . What might ,
Worthy Sebastian ? O ! what might ?No more :
And yet methinks I see it in thy face ,
What thou should'st be . The occasion speaks thee ; and 
My strong imagination sees a crown 
Dropping upon thy head .

What ! art thou waking ?

Do you not hear me speak ?

I do ; and surely ,
It is a sleepy language , and thou speak'st 
Out of thy sleep . What is it thou didst say ?
This is a strange repose , to be asleep 
With eyes wide open ; standing , speaking , moving ,
And yet so fast asleep .

Noble Sebastian ,
Thou let'st thy fortune sleep die rather ; wink'st 
Whiles thou art waking .

Thou dost snore distinctly :
There's meaning in thy snores .

I am more serious than my custom : you 
Must be so too , if heed me ; which to do 
Trebles thee o'er .

Well ; I am standing water .

I'll teach you how to flow .

Do so : to ebb ,
Hereditary sloth instructs me .

O !
If you but knew how you the purpose cherish 
Whiles thus you mock it ! how , in stripping it ,
You more invest it ! Ebbing men , indeed ,
Most often do so near the bottom run 
By their own fear or sloth .

Prithee , say on :
The setting of thine eye and cheek proclaim 
A matter from thee , and a birth indeed 
Which throes thee much to yield .

Thus , sir :
Although this lord of weak remembrance , this 
Who shall be of as little memory 
When he is earth'd , hath here almost persuaded ,
For he's a spirit of persuasion , only 
Professes to persuade ,the king , his son's alive ,
'Tis as impossible that he's undrown'd 
As he that sleeps here swims .

I have no hope 
That he's undrown'd .

O ! out of that 'no hope 
What great hope have you ! no hope that way is 
Another way so high a hope that even 
Ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond ,
But doubts discovery there . Will you grant with me 
That Ferdinand is drown'd ?

He's gone .

Then tell me 
Who's the next heir of Naples ?

Claribel .

She that is Queen of Tums ; she that dwells 
Ten leagues beyond man's life ; she that from Naples 
Can have no note , unless the sun were post 
The man i' th' moon's too slow till new-born chins 
Be rough and razorable : she that , from whom ?
We all were sea-swallow'd , though some cast again ,
And by that destiny to perform an act 
Whereof what's past is prologue , what to come 
In yours and my discharge .

What stuff is this !How say you ?
'Tis true my brother's daughter's Queen of Tunis ;
So is she heir of Naples ; 'twixt which regions 
There is some space .

A space whose every cubit 
Seems to cry out , 'How shall that Claribel 
Measure us back to Naples ?Keep in Tunis ,
And let Sebastian wake !' Say , this were death 
That now hath seiz'd them ; why , they were no worse 
Than now they are . There be that can rule Naples 
As well as he that sleeps ; lords that can prate 
As amply and unnecessarily 
As this Gonzalo ; I myself could make 
A chough of as deep chat . O , that you bore 
The mind that I do ! what a sleep were this 
For your advancement ! Do you understand me ?

Methinks I do .

And how does your content 
Tender your own good fortune ?

I remember 
You did supplant your brother Prospero .

True :
And look how well my garments sit upon me ;
Much feater than before ; my brother's servants 
Were then my fellows ; now they are my men .

But , for your conscience ,

Ay , sir ; where lies that ? if it were a kibe ,
'Twould put me to my slipper ; but I feel not 
This deity in my bosom : twenty consciences ,
That stand 'twixt me and Milan , candied be they ,
And melt ere they molest ! Here lies your brother ,
No better than the earth he lies upon ,
If he were that which now he's like , that's dead ;
Whom I , with this obedient steel ,three inches of it ,
Can lay to bed for ever ; whiles you , doing thus ,
To the perpetual wink for aye might put 
This ancient morsel , this Sir Prudence , who 
Should not upbraid our course . For all the rest ,
They'll take suggestion as a cat laps milk ;
They'll tell the clock to any business that 
We say befits the hour .

Thy case , dear friend ,
Shall be my precedent : as thou got'st Milan ,
I'll come by Naples . Draw thy sword : one stroke 
Shall free thee from the tribute which thou pay'st ,
And I the king shall love thee .

Draw together ;
And when I rear my hand , do you the like ,
To fall it on Gonzalo .

O ! but one word .

My master through his art foresees the danger 
That you , his friend , are in ; and sends me forth 
For else his project dies to keep thee living .


While you here do snoring lie ,
Open-ey'd Conspiracy 
His time doth take .
If of life you keep a care ,
Shake off slumber , and beware 
Awake ! awake !


Then let us both be sudden .

Now , good angels 
Preserve the king !


Why , how now ! ho , awake ! Why are you drawn ?
Wherefore this ghastly looking ?

What's the matter ?

Whiles we stood here securing your repose ,
Even now , we heard a hollow burst of bellowing 
Like bulls , or rather hons ; did't not wake you ?
It struck mine ear most terribly .

I heard nothing .

O ! 'twas a din to fright a monster's ear ,
To make an earthquake : sure it was the roar 
Of a whole herd of lions .

Heard you this , Gonzalo ?

Upon mine honour , sir , I heard a humming ,
And that a strange one too , which did awake me .
I shak'd you , sir , and cry'd ; as mine eyes open'd ,
I saw their weapons drawn :there was a noise ,
That's verily . 'Tis best we stand upon our guard ,
Or that we quit this place : let's draw our weapons .

Lead off this ground , and let's make further search 
For my poor son .

Heavens keep him from these beasts !
For he is , sure , i' the island .

Lead away .


Prospero my lord shall know what I have done :
So , king , go safely on to seek thy son .


All the infections that the sun sucks up 
From bogs , fens , flats , on Prosper fall , and make him 
By inch-meal a disease ! His spirits hear me ,
And yet I needs must curse . But they'll nor pinch ,
Fright me with urchin-shows , pitch me i' the mire ,
Nor lead me , like a firebrand , in the dark 
Out of my way , unless he bid 'em ; but 
For every trifle are they set upon me :
Sometime like apes , that mow and chatter at me 
And after bite me ; then like hedge-hogs , which 
Lie tumbling in my bare-foot way and mount 
Their pricks at my foot-fall ; sometime am I 
All wound with adders , who with cloven tongues 
Do hiss me into madness .


Lo now ! lo !
Here comes a spirit of his , and to torment me 
For bringing wood in slowly : I'll fall flat ;

Perchance he will not mind me .

Here's neither bush nor shrub to bear off any weather at all , and another storm brewing ; I hear it sing i' the wind : yond same black cloud , yond huge one , looks like a foul bombard that would shed his liquor . If it should thunder as it did before , I know not where to hide my head : yond same cloud cannot choose but fall by pailfuls .What have we here ? a man or a fish ? Dead or alive ? A fish : he smells like a fish ; a very ancient and fish-like smell ; a kind of not of the newest Poor-John . A strange fish ! Were I in England now ,as once I was ,and had but this fish painted , not a holiday fool there but would give a piece of silver : there would this monster make a man ; any strange beast there makes a man . When they will not give a doit to relieve a lame beggar , they will lay out ten to see a dead Indian . Legg'd like a man ! and his fins like arms ! Warm , o' my troth ! I do now let loose my opinion , hold it no longer ; this is no fish , but an islander , that hath lately suffered by a thunderbolt .

Alas ! the storm is come again : my best way is to creep under his gaberdine ; there is no other shelter hereabout : misery acquaints a man with strange bedfellows . I will here shroud till the dregs of the storm be past .

I shall no more to sea , to sea ,
Here shall I die a-shore :

This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a man's funeral :
Well , here's my comfort .


The master , the swabber , the boatswain and I ,
The gunner and his mate ,
Lov'd Mall , Meg , and Marian and Margery ,
But none of us car'd for Kate ;
For she had a tongue with a tang ,
Would cry to a sailor , 'Go hang !' 
She lov'd not the savour of tar nor of pitch ,
Yet a tailor might scratch her where-e'er she did itch :
Then to sea , boys , and let her go hang .

This is a scurvy tune too : but here's my comfort .


Do not torment me : O !

What's the matter ? Have we devils here ? Do you put tricks upon us with savages and men of Ind ? Ha ! I have not 'scaped drowning , to be afeard now of your four legs ; for it hath been said , As proper a man as ever went on four legs cannot make him give ground : and it shall be said so again while Stephano breathes at's nostrils .

The spirit torments me : O !

This is some monster of the isle with four legs , who hath got , as I take it , an ague . Where the devil should he learn our language ? I will give him some relief , if it be but for that : if I can recover him and keep him tame and get to Naples with him , he's a present for any emperor that ever trod on neat's-leather .

Do not torment me , prithee : I'll bring my wood home faster .

He's in his fit now and does not talk after the wisest . He shall taste of my bottle : if he have never drunk wine afore it will go near to remove his fit . If I can recover him , and keep him tame , I will not take too much for him : he shall pay for him that hath him , and that soundly .

Thou dost me yet but little hurt ; thou wilt anon , I know it by thy trembling : now Prosper works upon thee .

Come on your ways : open your mouth ; here is that which will give language to you , cat . Open your mouth : this will shake your shaking , I can tell you , and that soundly 

: you cannot tell who's your friend ; open your chaps again .

I should know that voice : it should be but he is drowned , and these are devils . O ! defend me .

Four legs and two voices ; a most delicate monster ! His forward voice now is to speak well of his friend ; his backward voice is to utter foul speeches , and to detract . If all the wine in my bottle will recover him , I will help his ague . Come . Amen ! I will pour some in thy other mouth .

Stephano !

Doth thy other mouth call me ? Mercy ! mercy ! This is a devil , and no monster : I will leave him ; I have no long spoon .

Stephano !if thou beest Stephano , touch me , and speak to me ; for I am Trinculo :be not afeard thy good friend Trinculo .

If thou beest Trinculo , come forth . I'll pull thee by the lesser legs : if any be Trinculo's legs , these are they . Thou art very Trinculo indeed ! How cam'st thou to be the siege of this moon-calf ? Can he vent Trinculos ?

I took him to be killed with a thunderstroke . But art thou not drowned , Stephano ? I hope now thou art not drowned . Is the storm overblown ? I hid me under the dead mooncalf's gaberdine for fear of the storm . And art thou living , Stephano ? O Stephano ! two Neapolitans 'scaped !

Prithee , do not turn me about : my stomach is not constant .

These be fine things an if they be not sprites .
That's a brave god and bears celestial liquor :
I will kneel to him .

How didst thou 'scape ? How cam'st thou hither ? swear by this bottle , how thou cam'st hither . I escaped upon a butt of sack , which the sailors heaved overboard , by this bottle ! which I made of the bark of a tree with mine own hands , since I was cast ashore .

I'll swear upon that bottle , to be thy true subject ; for the liquor is not earthly .

Here : swear then , how thou escapedst .

Swam ashore , man , like a duck : I can swim like a duck , I'll be sworn .

Here , kiss the book 

. Though thou canst swim like a duck , thou art made like a goose .

O Stephano ! hast any more of this ?

The whole butt , man : my cellar is in a rock by the seaside , where my wine is hid . How now , moon-calf ! how does thine ague ?

Hast thou not dropped from heaven ?

Out o the moon , I do assure thee : I was the man in the moon , when time was .

I have seen thee in her , and I do adore thee ; my mistress showed me thee , and thy dog , and thy bush .

Come , swear to that ; kiss the book ; I will furnish it anon with new contents ; swear .

By this good light , this is a very shallow monster .I afeard of him !a very weak monster .The man i' the moon ! a most poor credulous monster !Well drawn , monster , in good sooth .

I'll show thee every fertile inch o' the island ;
And I will kiss thy foot . I prithee , be my god .

By this light , a most perfidious and drunken monster : when his god's asleep , he'll rob his bottle .

I'll kiss thy foot : I'll swear myself thy subject .

Come on then ; down , and swear .

I shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-headed monster . A most scurvy monster ! I could find in my heart to beat him ,

Come , kiss .

But that the poor monster's in drink : an abominable monster !

I'll shew thee the best springs ; I'll pluck thee berries ;
I'll fish for thee , and get thee wood enough .
A plague upon the tyrant that I serve !
I'll bear him no more sticks , but follow thee ,
Thou wondrous man .

A most ridiculous monster , to make a wonder of a poor drunkard !

I prithee , let me bring thee where crabs grow ;
And I with my long nails will dig thee pig-nuts ;
Show thee a jay's nest and instruct thee how 
To snare the nimble marmozet ; I'll bring thee 
To clust'ring filberts , and sometimes I'll get thee 
Young scamels from the rock . Wilt thou go with me ?

I prithee now , lead the way , without any more talking .Trinculo , the king and all our company else being drowned , we will inherit here .Here ; bear my bottle .Fellow Trinculo , we'll fill him by and by again .

Farewell , master ; farewell , farewell 


A howling monster , a drunken monster .


No more dams I'll make for fish ,
Nor fetch in firing 
At requiring ,
Nor scrape trenchering , nor wash dish ,
'Ban , 'Ban , Ca Caliban ,
Has a new master Get a new man .

Freedom , high-day ! high-day , freedom ! freedom ! high-day , freedom !

O brave monster ! lead the way .

There be some sports are painful , and their labour 
Delight in them sets off : some kinds of baseness 
Are nobly undergone , and most poor matters 
Point to rich ends . This my mean task 
Would be as heavy to me as odious ; but 
The mistress which I serve quickens what's dead 
And makes my labours pleasures : O ! she is 
Ten times more gentle than her father's crabbed ,
And he's compos'd of harshness . I must remove 
Some thousands of these logs and pile them up ,
Upon a sore injunction : my sweet mistress 
Weeps when she sees me work , and says such baseness 
Had never like executor . I forget :
But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labours ,
Most busiest when I do it .


Alas ! now , pray you ,
Work not so hard : I would the lightning had 
Burnt up those logs that you are enjoin'd to pile !
Pray , set it down and rest you : when this burns ,
'Twill weep for having wearied you . My father 
Is hard at study ; pray now , rest yourself :
He's safe for these three hours .

O most dear mistress ,
The sun will set , before I shall discharge 
What I must strive to do .

If you'll sit down ,
I'll bear your logs the while . Pray , give me that ;
I'll carry it to the pile .

No , precious creature :
I had rather crack my sinews , break my back ,
Than you should such dishonour undergo ,
While I sit lazy by .

It would become me 
As well as it does you : and I should do it 
With much more ease ; for my good will is to it ,
And yours it is against .

Poor worm ! thou art infected :
This visitation shows it .

You look wearily .

No , noble mistress ; 'tis fresh morning with me 
When you are by at night . I do beseech you 
Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers 
What is your name ?

Miranda .O my father !
I have broke your hest to say so .

Admir'd Miranda !
Indeed , the top of admiration ; worth 
What's dearest to the world ! Full many a lady 
I have ey'd with best regard , and many a time 
The harmony of their tongues hath into bondage 
Brought my too diligent ear : for several virtues 
Have I lik'd several women ; never any 
With so full soul but some defect in her 
Did quarrel with the noblest grace she ow'd ,
And put it to the foil : but you , O you !
So perfect and so peerless , are created 
Of every creature's best .

I do not know 
One of my sex ; no woman's face remember ,
Save , from my glass , mine own ; nor have I seen 
More that I may call men than you , good friend ,
And my dear father : how features are abroad ,
I am skill-less of ; but , by my modesty ,
The jewel in my dower ,I would not wish 
Any companion in the world but you ;
Nor can imagination form a shape ,
Besides yourself , to like of . But I prattle 
Something too wildly and my father's precepts 
I therein do forget .

I am in my condition 
A prince , Miranda ; I do think , a king ;
I would not so !and would no more endure 
This wooden slavery than to suffer 
The flesh-fly blow my mouth .Hear my soul speak :
The very instant that I saw you did 
My heart fly to your service ; there resides ,
To make me slave to it ; and for your sake 
Am I this patient log-man .

Do you love me ?

O heaven ! O earth ! bear witness to this sound ,
And crown what I profess with kind event 
If I speak true : if hollowly , invert 
What best is boded me to mischief ! I ,
Beyond all limit of what else i' the world ,
Do love , prize , honour you .

I am a fool 
To weep at what I am glad of .

Fair encounter 
Of two most rare affections ! Heavens rain grace 
On that which breeds between them !

Wherefore weep you ?

At mine unworthiness , that dare not offer 
What I desire to give ; and much less take 
What I shall die to want . But this is trifling ;
And all the more it seeks to hide itself 
The bigger bulk it shows . Hence , bashful cunning !
And prompt me , plain and holy innocence !
I am your wife , if you will marry me ;
If not , I'll die your maid : to be your fellow 
You may deny me ; but I'll be your servant 
Whether you will or no .

My mistress , dearest ;
And I thus humble ever .

My husband then ?

Ay , with a heart as willing 
As bondage e'er of freedom : here's my hand .

And mine , with my heart in't : and now farewell 
Till half an hour hence .

A thousand thousand !


So glad of this as they , I cannot be ,
Who are surpris'd withal ; but my rejoicing 
At nothing can be more . I'll to my book ;
For yet , ere supper time , must I perform 
Much business appertaining .


Tell not me :when the butt is out , we will drink water ; not a drop before : therefore bear up , and board 'em .Servant-monster , drink to me .

Servant-monster ! the folly of this island ! They say there's but five upon this isle : we are three of them ; if th' other two be brained like us , the state totters .

Drink , servant-monster , when I bid thee : thy eyes are almost set in thy head .

Where should they be set else ? he were a brave monster indeed , if they were set in his tail .

My man-monster hath drowned his tongue in sack : for my part , the sea cannot drown me ; I swam , ere I could recover the shore , five-and-thirty leagues , off and on , by this light . Thou shalt be my lieutenant , monster , or my standard .

Your lieutenant , if you list ; he's no standard .

We'll not run , Monsieur monster .

Nor go neither : but you'll lie , like dogs ; and yet say nothing neither .

Moon-calf , speak once in thy life , if thou beest a good moon-calf .

How does thy honour ? Let me lick thy shoe . I'll not serve him , he is not valiant .

Thou hest , most ignorant monster : I am in case to justle a constable . Why , thou deboshed fish thou , was there ever a man a coward that hath drunk so much sack as I to-day ? Wilt thou tell a monstrous lie , being but half a fish and half a monster ?

Lo , how he mocks me ! wilt thou let him , my lord ?

'Lord' quoth he !that a monster should be such a natural !

Lo , lo , again ! bite him to death , I prithee .

Trinculo , keep a good tongue in your head : if you prove a mutineer , the next tree ! The poor monster's my subject , and he shall not suffer indignity .

I thank my noble lord . Wilt thou be pleas'd 
To hearken once again the suit I made thee ?

Marry , will I ; kneel , and repeat it : I will stand , and so shall Trinculo .


As I told thee before , I am subject to a tyrant , a sorcerer , that by his cunning hath cheated me of the island .

Thou liest .

Thou liest , thou jesting monkey thou ;
I would my valiant master would destroy thee ;
I do not lie .

Trinculo , if you trouble him any more in his tale , by this hand , I will supplant some of your teeth .

Why , I said nothing .

Mum then and no more .

Proceed .

I say , by sorcery he got this isle ;
From me he got it : if thy greatness will ,
Revenge it on him ,for , I know , thou dar'st ;
But this thing dare not ,

That's most certain .

Thou shalt be lord of it and I'll serve thee .

How now shall this be compassed ? Canst thou bring me to the party ?

Yea , yea , my lord : I'll yield him thee asleep ,
Where thou may'st knock a nail into his head .

Thou liest ; thou canst not .

What a pied ninny's this ! Thou scurvy patch !
I do beseech thy greatness , give him blows ,
And take his bottle from him : when that's gone 
He shall drink nought but brine ; for I'll not show him 
Where the quick freshes are .

Trinculo , run into no further danger : interrupt the monster one word further , and , by this hand , I'll turn my mercy out o' doors and make a stock-fish of thee .

Why , what did I ? I did nothing . I'll go further off .

Didst thou not say he hed ?

Thou liest .

Do I so ? take thou that .


As you like this , give me the lie another time .

I did not give thee the he :Out o' your wits and hearing too ?A pox o' your bottle ! this can sack and drinking do .A murrain on your monster , and the devil take your fingers !

Ha , ha , ha !

Now , forward with your tale .Prithee stand further off .

Beat him enough : after a little time 
I'll beat him too .

Stand further .Come , proceed .

Why , as I told thee , 'tis a custom with him 
I' the afternoon to sleep : there thou may'st brain him ,
Having first seiz'd his books ; or with a log 
Batter his skull , or paunch him with a stake ,
Or cut his wezand with thy knife . Remember 
First to possess his books ; for without them 
He's but a sot , as I am , nor hath not 
One spirit to command : they all do hate him 
As rootedly as I . Burn but his books ;
He has brave utensils ,for so he calls them ,
Which , when he has a house , he'll deck withal :
And that most deeply to consider is 
The beauty of his daughter ; he himself 
Calls her a nonpareil : I never saw a woman ,
But only Sycorax my dam and she ;
But she as far surpasseth Sycorax 
As great'st does least .

Is it so brave a lass ?

Ay , lord ; she will become thy bed , I warrant ,
And bring thee forth brave brood .

Monster , I will kill this man : his daughter and I will be king and queen ,save our graces ! and Trinculo and thyself shall be viceroys . Dost thou like the plot , Trinculo ?

Excellent .

Give me thy hand : I am sorry I beat thee ; but , while thou livest , keep a good tongue in thy head .

Within this half hour will he be asleep ;
Wilt thou destroy him then ?

Ay , on mine honour .

This will I tell my master .

Thou mak'st me merry : I am full of pleasure .
Let us be jocund : will you troll the catch 
You taught me but while-ere ?

At thy request , monster , I will do reason , any reason : Come on , Trinculo , let us sing .


Flout 'em , and scout 'em ; and scout 'em , and flout 'em ;
Thought is free .


That's not the tune .


What is this same ?

This is the tune of our catch , played by the picture of Nobody .

If thou beest a man , show thyself in thy likeness : if thou beest a devil , take't as thou list .

O , forgive me my sins !

He that dies pays all debts : I defy thee .Mercy upon us !

Art thou afeard ?

No , monster , not I .

Be not afeard : the isle is full of noises ,
Sounds and sweet airs , that give delight , and hurt not .
Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments 
Will hum about mine ears ; and sometime voices ,
That , if I then had wak'd after long sleep ,
Will make mesleep again : and then , in dreaming ,
The clouds methought would open and show riches 
Ready to drop upon me ; that , when I wak'd 
I cried to dream again .

This will prove a brave kingdom to me , where I shall have my music for nothing .

When Prospero is destroyed .

That shall be by and by : I remember the story .

The sound is going away : let's follow it , and after do our work .

Lead , monster ; we'll follow .I would I could see this taborer ! he lays it on . Wilt come ?

I'll follow , Stephano .


By'r lakin , I can go no further , sir ;
My old bones ache : here's a maze trod indeed ,
Through forth-rights , and meanders ! by your patience ,
I needs must rest me .

Old lord , I cannot blame thee ,
Who am myself attach'd with weariness ,
To the dulling of my spirits : sit down , and rest .
Even here I will put off my hope , and keep it 
No longer for my flatterer : he is drown'd 
Whom thus we stray to find ; and the sea mocks 
Our frustrate search on land . Well , let him go .

I am right glad that he's so out of hope .
Do not , for one repulse , forego the purpose 
That you resolv'd to effect .

The next advantage 
Will we take throughly .

Let it be to-night ;
For , now they are oppress'd with travel , they 
Will not , nor cannot , use such vigilance 
As when they are fresh .

I say to-night : no more .

What harmony is this ? my good friends , hark !

Marvellous sweet music !

Give us kind keepers , heavens ! What were these ?

A living drollery . Now I will believe 
That there are unicorns ; that in Arabia 
There is one tree , the ph nix' throne ; one ph nix 
At this hour reigning there .

I'll believe both ;
And what does else want credit , come to me ,
And I'll be sworn 'tis true : travellers ne'er did lie ,
Though fools at home condemn them .

If in Naples 
I should report this now , would they believe me ?
If I should say I saw such islanders ,
For , certes , these are people of the island ,
Who , though they are of monstrous shape , yet , note ,
Their manners are more gentle-kind than of 
Our human generation you shall find 
Many , nay , almost any .

Honest lord ,
Thou hast said well ; for some of you there present 
Are worse than devils .

I cannot too much muse ,
Such shapes , such gesture , and such sound , expressing ,
Although they want the use of tongue ,a kind 
Of excellent dumb discourse .

Praise in departing .

They vanish'd strangely .

No matter , since 
They have left their viands behind ; for we have stomachs .
Will't please you to taste of what is here ?

Not I .

Faith , sir , you need not fear . When we were boys ,
Who would believe that there were mountaineers 
Dew-lapp'd like bulls , whose throats had hanging at them 
Wallets of flesh ? or that there were such men 
Whose heads stood in their breasts ? which now we find 
Each putter-out of five for one will bring us 
Good warrant of .

I will stand to and feed ,
Although my last ; no matter , since I feel 
The best is past .Brother , my lord the duke ,
Stand to and do as we .

You are three men of sin , whom Destiny 
That hath to instrument this lower world 
And what is in't ,the never-surfeited sea 
Hath caused to belch up you ; and on this island 
Where man doth not inhabit ; you 'mongst men 
Being most unfit to live . I have made you mad ;


And even with such-like valour men hang and drown 
Their proper selves . You fools ! I and my fellows 
Are ministers of fate : the elements 
Of whom your swords are temper'd , may as well 
Wound the loud winds , or with bemock'd-at stabs 
Kill the still-closing waters , as diminish 
One dowle that's in my plume ; my fellow-ministers 
Are like invulnerable . If you could hurt ,
Your swords are now too massy for your strengths ,
And will not be uplifted . But , remember ,
For that's my business to you ,that you three 
From Milan did supplant good Prospero ;
Expos'd unto the sea , which hath requit it ,
Him and his innocent child : for which foul deed 
The powers , delaying , not forgetting , have 
Incens'd the seas and shores , yea , all the creatures ,
Against your peace . Thee of thy son , Alonso ,
They have bereft ; and do pronounce , by me ,
Lingering perdition ,worse than any death 
Can be at once ,shall step by step attend 
You and your ways ; whose wraths to guard you from 
Which here in this most desolate isle , else falls 
Upon your heads ,is nothing but heart-sorrow 
And a clear life ensuing .


Bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou 
Perform'd , my Ariel ; a grace it had , devouring :
Of my instruction hast thou nothing bated 
In what thou hadst to say : so , with good life 
And observation strange , my meaner ministers 
Their several kinds have done . My high charms work ,
And these mine enemies are all knit up 
In their distractions : they now are in my power ;
And in these fits I leave them , while I visit 
Young Ferdinand ,whom they suppose is drown'd ,
And his and mine lov'd darling .


I the name of something holy , sir , why stand you 
In this strange stare ?

O , it is monstrous ! monstrous !
Methought the billows spoke and told me of it ;
The winds did sing it to me ; and the thunder ,
That deep and dreadful organ-pipe , pronounc'd 
The name of Prosper : it did bass my trespass .
Therefore my son i' th' ooze is bedded ; and 
I'll seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded ,
And with him there lie mudded .


But one fiend at a time ,
I'll fight their legions o'er .

I'll be thy second .


All three of them are desperate ; their great guilt ,
Like poison given to work a great time after ,
Now 'gins to bite the spirits .I do beseech you 
That are of suppler joints , follow them swiftly 
And hinder them from what this ecstasy 
May now provoke them to .

Follow , I pray you .

If I have too austerely punish'd you ,
Your compensation makes amends ; for I 
Have given you here a third of mine own life ,
Or that for which I live ; whom once again 
I tender to thy hand : all thy vexations 
Were but my trials of thy love , and thou 
Hast strangely stood the test : here , afore Heaven ,
I ratify this my rich gift . O Ferdinand !
Do not smile at me that I boast her off ,
For thou shalt find she will outstrip all praise ,
And make it halt behind her .

I do believe it 
Against an oracle .

Then , as my gift and thine own acquisition 
Worthily purchas'd , take my daughter : but 
If thou dost break her virgin knot before 
All sanctimonious ceremonies may 
With full and holy rite be minister'd ,
No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall 
To make this contract grow ; but barren hate ,
Sour-ey'd disdain and discord shall bestrew 
The union of your bed with weeds so loathly 
That you shall hate it both : therefore take heed ,
As Hymen's lamps shall light you .

As I hope 
For quiet days , fair issue and long life ,
With such love as 'tis now , the murkiest den ,
The most opportune place , the strong'st sug gestion 
Our worser genius can , shall never melt 
Mine honour into lust , to take away 
The edge of that day's celebration 
When I shall think , or Ph bus' steeds are founder'd ,
Or Night kept chain'd below .

Fairly spoke :
Sit then , and talk with her , she is thine own .
What , Ariell my industrious servant Ariell 


What would my potent master ? here I am .

Thou and thy meaner fellows your last service 
Did worthily perform ; and I must use you 
In such another trick . Go bring the rabble ,
O'er whom I give thee power , here to this place :
Incite them to quick motion ; for I must 
Bestow upon the eyes of this young couple 
Some vanity of mine art : it is my promise ,
And they expect it from me .

Presently ?

Ay , with a twink .

Before you can say , 'Come ,' and 'Go ,' 
And breathe twice ; and cry , 'so , so ,' 
Each one , tripping on his toe ,
Will be here with mop and mow .
Do you love me , master ? no ?

Dearly my delicate Ariel . Do not approach 
Till thou dost hear me call .

Well , I conceive .


Look , thou be true ; do not give dalliance 
Too much the rein : the strongest oaths are straw 
To the fire i' the blood : be more abstemious ,
Or else good night your vow !

I warrant you , sir ;
The white-cold virgin snow upon my heart 
Abates the ardour of my liver .

Well .
Now come , my Ariel ! bring a corollary ,
Rather than want a spirit : appear , and pertly .
No tongue ! all eyes ! be silent .

Ceres , most bounteous lady , thy rich leas 
Of wheat , rye , barley , vetches , oats , and peas ;
Thy turfy mountains , where live nibbling sheep ,
And flat meads thatch'd with stover , them to keep ;
Thy banks with pioned and twilled brims ,
Which spongy April at thy hest betrims ,
To make cold nymphs chaste crowns ; and thy broom groves ,
Whose shadow the dismissed bachelor loves ,
Being lass-lorn ; thy pole-clipt vineyard ;
And thy sea-marge , sterile and rocky-hard ,
Where thou thyself dost air : the queen o' the sky ,
Whose watery arch and messenger am I ,
Bids thee leave these ; and with her sovereign grace ,
Here on this grass-plot , in this very place ,
To come and sport ; her peacocks fly amain :
Approach , rich Ceres , her to entertain .


Hail , many-colour'd messenger , that ne'er 
Dost disobey the wife of Jupiter ;
Who with thy saffron wings upon my flowers 
Diffusest honey-drops , refreshing showers :
And with each end of thy blue bow dost crown 
My bosky acres , and my unshrubb'd down ,
Rich scarf to my proud earth ; why hath thy queen 
Summon'd me hither , to this short-grass'd green ?

A contract of true love to celebrate ,
And some donation freely to estate 
On the bless'd lovers .

Tell me , heavenly bow ,
If Venus or her son , as thou dost know ,
Do now attend the queen ? since they did plot 
The means that dusky Dis my daughter got ,
Her and her blind boy's scandal'd company 
I have forsworn .

Of her society 
Be not afraid ; I met her deity 
Cutting the clouds towards Paphos and her son 
Dove-drawn with her . Here thought they to have done 
Some wanton charm upon this man and maid ,
Whose vows are , that no bed-rite shall be paid 
Till Hymen's torch be lighted ; but in vain :
Mars's hot minion is return'd again ;
Her waspish-headed son has broke his arrows ,
Swears he will shoot no more , but play with sparrows ,
And be a boy right out .

Highest queen of state ,
Great Juno comes ; I know her by her gait .


How does my bounteous sister ? Go with me 
To bless this twain , that they may prosperous be ,
And honour'd in their issue .

Honour , riches , marriage-blessing ,
Long continuance , and increasing ,
Hourly joys be still upon you !
Juno sings her blessings on you .

Earth's increase , foison plenty ,
Barns and garners never empty :
Vines , with clust'ring bunches growing ;
Plants with goodly burden bowing ;
Spring come to you at the farthest 
In the very end of harvest !
Scarcity and want shall shun you ;
Ceres' blessing so is on you .

This is a most majestic vision , and 
Harmonious charmingly : May I be bold 
To think these spirits ?

Spirits , which by mine art 
I have from their confines call'd to enact 
My present fancies .

Let me live here ever :
So rare a wonder'd father and a wise ,
Makes this place Paradise .


Sweet , now , silence !
Juno and Ceres whisper seriously ,
There's something else to do : hush , and be mute ,
Or else our spell is marr'd .

You nymphs , call'd Naiades , of the windring brooks ,
With your sedg'd crowns , and ever-harmless looks ,
Leave your crisp channels , and on this green land 
Answer your summons : Juno does command .
Come , temperate nymphs , and help to celebrate 
A contract of true love : be not too late .


You sun-burn'd sicklemen , of August weary ,
Come hither from the furrow , and be merry :
Make holiday : your rye-straw hats put on ,
And these fresh nymphs encounter every one 
In country footing .


I had forgot that foul conspiracy 
Of the beast Caliban , and his confederates 
Against my life : the minute of their plot 
Is almost come .

Well done ! avoid ; no more !

This is strange : your father's in some passion 
That works him strongly .

Never till this day 
Saw I him touch'd with anger so distemper'd .

You do look , my son , in a mov'd sort ,
As if you were dismay'd : be cheerful , sir :
Our revels now are ended . These our actors ,
As I foretold you , were all spirits and 
Are melted into air , into thin air :
And , like the baseless fabric of this vision ,
The cloud-capp'd towers , the gorgeous palaces ,
The solemn temples , the great globe itself ,
Yea , all which it inherit , shall dissolve 
And , like this insubstantial pageant faded ,
Leave not a rack behind . We are such stuff 
As dreams are made on , and our little life 
Is rounded with a sleep .Sir , I am vex'd :
Bear with my weakness ; my old brain is troubled .
Be not disturb'd with my infirmity .
If you be pleas'd , retire into my cell 
And there repose : a turn or two I'll walk ,
To still my beating mind .

We wish your peace .


Come with a thought !

I thank thee : Ariel , come !


Thy thoughts I cleave to . What's thy pleasure ?

Spirit ,
We must prepare to meet with Caliban .

Ay , my commander ; when I presented Ceres ,
I thought to have told thee of it ; but I fear'd 
Lest I might anger thee .

Say again , where didst thou leave these varlets ?

I told you , sir , they were red-hot with drinking ;
So full of valour that they smote the air 
For breathing in their faces ; beat the ground 
For kissing of their feet ; yet always bending 
Towards their project . Then I beat my tabor ;
At which , like unback'd colts , they prick'd their ears ,
Advanc'd their eyelids , lifted up their noses 
As they smelt music : so I charm'd their ears 
That , calf-like , they my lowing follow'd through 
Tooth'd briers , sharp furzes , pricking goss and thorns ,
Which enter'd their frail shins : at last I left them 
I' the filthy-mantled pool beyond your cell ,
There dancing up to the chins , that the foul lake 
O'erstunk their feet .

This was well done , my bird .
Thy shape invisible retain thou still :
The trumpery in my house , go bring it hither ,
For stale to catch these thieves .

I go , I go .


A devil , a born devil , on whose nature 
Nurture can never stick ; on whom my pains ,
Humanely taken , are all lost , quite lost ;
And as with age his body uglier grows ,
So his mind cankers . I will plague them all ,
Even to roaring .


Come , hang them on this line .

Pray you , tread softly , that the blind mole may not 
Hear a foot fall : we now are near his cell .

Monster , your fairy , which you say is a harmless fairy , has done little better than played the Jack with us .

Monster , I do smell all horse-piss ; at which my nose is in great indignation .

So is mine .Do you hear , monster ? If I should take a displeasure against you , look you ,

Thou wert but a lost monster .

Good my lord , give me thy favour still :
Be patient , for the prize I'll bring thee to 
Shall hoodwink this mischance : therefore speak softly ;
All's hush'd as midnight yet .

Ay , but to lose our bottles in the pool ,

There is not only disgrace and dishonour in that , monster , but an infinite loss .

That's more to me than my wetting : yet this is your harmless fairy , monster .

I will fetch off my bottle , though I be o'er ears for my labour .

Prithee , my king , be quiet . Seest thou here ,
This is the mouth o' the cell : no noise , and enter .
Do that good mischief , which may make this island 
Thine own for ever , and I , thy Caliban ,
For aye thy foot-licker .

Give me thy hand : I do begin to have bloody thoughts .

O king Stephano ! O peer ! O worthy Stephano ! look , what a wardrobe here is for thee !

Let it alone , thou fool ; it is but trash .

O , ho , monster ! we know what belongs to a frippery .O king Stephano !

Put off that gown , Trinculo ; by this hand , I'll have that gown .

Thy grace shall have it .

The dropsy drown this fooll what do you mean 
To dote thus on such luggage ? Let's along ,
And do the murder first : if he awake ,
From toe to crown he'll fill our skins with pinches ;
Make us strange stuff .

Be you quiet , monster .Mistress line , is not this my jerkin ? Now is the jerkin under the line : now , jerkin , you are like to lose your hair and prove a bald jerkin .

Do , do : we steal by line and level , an't like your grace .

I thank thee for that jest ; here's a garment for't : wit shall not go unrewarded while I am king of this country : 'Steal by line and level ,' is an excellent pass of pate ; there's another garment for't .

Monster , come , put some lime upon your fingers , and away with the rest .

I will have none on't : we shall lose our time ,
And all be turn'd to barnacles , or to apes 
With foreheads villanous low .

Monster , lay-to your fingers : help to bear this away where my hogshead of wine is , or I'll turn you out of my kingdom . Go to ; carry this .

And this .

Ay , and this .

Hey , Mountain , hey !

Silver ! there it goes , Silver !

Fury , Fury ! there , Tyrant , there ! hark , hark !

Go , charge my goblins that they grind their joints 
With dry convulsions ; shorten up their sinews 
With aged cramps , and more pinch-spotted make them 
Than pard , or cat o' mountain .

Hark ! they roar .

Let them be hunted soundly . At this hour 
Lie at my mercy all mine enemies :
Shortly shall all my labours end , and thou 
Shalt have the air at freedom : for a little ,
Follow , and do me service .

Now does my project gather to a head :
My charms crack not ; my spirits obey , and time 
Goes upright with his carriage . How's the day ?

On the sixth hour ; at which time , my lord ,
You said our work should cease .

I did say so ,
When first I rais'd the tempest . Say , my spirit ,
How fares the king and's followers ?

Confin'd together 
In the same fashion as you gave in charge ,
Just as you left them : all prisoners , sir ,
In the line-grove which weather-fends your cell ;
They cannot budge till your release . The king ,
His brother , and yours , abide all three distracted ,
And the remainder mourning over them ,
Brimful of sorrow and dismay ; but chiefly 
Him , that you term'd , sir , 'The good old lord Gonzalo :' 
His tears run down his beard , like winter's drops 
From eaves of reeds ; your charm so strongly works them ,
That if you now beheld them , your affections 
Would become tender .

Dost thou think so , spirit ?

Mine would , sir , were I human .

And mine shall .
Hast thou , which art but air , a touch , a feeling 
Of their afflictions , and shall not myself ,
One of their kind , that relish all as sharply ,
Passion as they , be kindlier mov'd than thou art ?
Though with their high wrongs I am struck to the quick ,
Yet with my nobler reason 'gainst my fury 
Do I take part : the rarer action is 
In virtue than in vengeance : they being penitent ,
The sole drift of my purpose doth extend 
Not a frown further . Go , release them , Ariel .
My charms I'll break , their senses I'll restore ,
And they shall be themselves .

I'll fetch them , sir 


Ye elves of hills , brooks , standing lakes , and groves ;
And ye , that on the sands with printless foot 
Do chase the ebbing Neptune and do fly him 
When he comes back ; you demi-puppets , that 
By moonshine do the green sour ringlets make 
Whereof the ewe not bites ; and you , whose pastime 
Is to make midnight mushrooms ; that rejoice 
To hear the solemn curfew ; by whose aid ,
Weak masters though ye be I have bedimm'd 
The noontide sun , call'd forth the mutinous winds ,
And 'twixt the green sea and the azur'd vault 
Set roaring war : to the dread-rattling thunder 
Have I given fire and rifted Jove's stout oak 
With his own bolt : the strong-bas'd promontory 
Have I made shake ; and by the spurs pluck'd up 
The pine and cedar : graves at my command 
Have wak'd their sleepers , op'd , and let them forth 
By my so potent art . But this rough magic 
I here abjure ; and , when I have requir'd 
Some heavenly music ,which even now I do ,
To work mine end upon their senses that 
This airy charm is for , I'll break my staff ,
Bury it certain fathoms in the earth ,
And , deeper than did ever plummet sound ,
I'll drown my book .

A solemn air and the best comforter 
To an unsettled fancy , cure thy brains ,
Now useless , boil'd within thy skull ! There stand ,
For you are spell-stopp'd .
Holy Gonzalo , honourable man ,
Mine eyes , even sociable to the show of thine ,
Fall fellowly drops . The charm dissolves apace ;
And as the morning steals upon the night ,
Melting the darkness , so their rising senses 
Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle 
Their clearer reason .O good Gonzalo !
My true preserver , and a loyal sir 
To him thou follow'st , I will pay thy graces 
Home , both in word and deed .Most cruelly 
Didst thou , Alonso , use me and my daughter :
Thy brother was a furtherer in the act ;
Thou'rt pinch'd for't now , Sebastian .Flesh and blood ,
You , brother mine , that entertain'd ambition ,
Expell'd remorse and nature ; who , with Sebastian ,
Whose inward pinches therefore are most strong ,
Would here have kill'd your king ; I do forgive thee ,
Unnatural though thou art !Their understanding 
Begins to swell , and the approaching tide 
Will shortly fill the reasonable shores 
That now lie foul and muddy . Not one of them 
That yet looks on me , or would know me .Ariel ,
Fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell :

I will discase me , and myself present ,
As I was sometime Milan .Quickly , spirit ;
Thou shalt ere long be free .


Where the bee sucks , there suck I 
In a cowslip's bell I he :
There I couch when owls do cry .
On the bat's back I do fly 
After summer merrily 
Merrily , merrily shall I live now 
Under the blossom that hangs on the bough 


Why , that's my dainty Ariel ! I shall miss thee ;
But yet thou shalt have freedom ;so , so , so .
To the king's ship , invisible as thou art :
There shalt thou find the mariners asleep 
Under the hatches ; the master and the boatswain 
Being awake , enforce them to this place ,
And presently , I prithee .

I drink the air before me , and return 
Or e'er your pulse twice beat .


All torment , trouble , wonder , and amazement 
Inhabits here : some heavenly power guide us 
Out of this fearful country !

Behold , sir king ,
The wronged Duke of Milan , Prospero .
For more assurance that a living prince 
Does now speak to thee , I embrace thy body ;
And to thee and thy company I bid 
A hearty welcome .

Whe'r thou beest he or no ,
Or some enchanted trifle to abuse me ,
As late I have been , I not know : thy pulse 
Beats , as of flesh and blood ; and , since I saw thee ,
Th' affliction of my mind amends , with which ,
I fear , a madness held me : this must crave ,
An if this be at all a most strange story .
Thy dukedom I resign , and do entreat 
Thou pardon me my wrongs .But how should Prospero 
Be living , and be here ?

First , noble friend ,
Let me embrace thine age ; whose honour cannot 
Be measur'd , or confin'd .

Whether this be ,
Or be not , I'll not swear .

You do yet taste 
Some subtilties o' the isle , that will not let you 
Believe things certain .Welcome ! my friends all :


But you , my brace of lords , were I so minded ,
I here could pluck his highness' frown upon you ,
And justify you traitors : at this time 
I will tell no tales .

The devil speaks in him .

No .
For you , most wicked sir , whom to call brother 
Would even infect my mouth , I do forgive 
Thy rankest fault ; all of them ; and require 
My dukedom of thee , which , perforce , I know ,
Thou must restore .

If thou beest Prospero ,
Give us particulars of thy preservation ;
How thou hast met us here , who three hours since 
Were wrack'd upon this shore ; where I have lost ,
How sharp the point of this remembrance is !
My dear son Ferdinand .

I am woe for't , sir .

Irreparable is the loss , and patience 
Says it is past her cure .

I rather think 
You have not sought her help ; of whose soft grace ,
For the like loss I have her sovereign aid ,
And rest myself content .

You the like loss !

As great to me , as late ; and , supportable 
To make the dear loss , have I means much weaker 
Than you may call to comfort you , for I 
Have lost my daughter .

A daughter ?
O heavens ! that they were living both in Naples ,
The king and queen there ! that they were , I wish 
Myself were mudded in that oozy bed 
Where my son lies . When did you lose your daughter ?

In this last tempest . I perceive , these lords 
At this encounter do so much admire 
That they devour their reason , and scarce think 
Their eyes do offices of truth , their words 
Are natural breath : but , howsoe'er you have 
Been justled from your senses , know for certain 
That I am Prospero and that very duke 
Which was thrust forth of Milan ; who most strangely 
Upon this shore , where you were wrack'd , was landed ,
To be the lord on't . No more yet of this ;
For 'tis a chronicle of day by day ,
Not a relation for a breakfast nor 
Befitting this first meeting . Welcome , sir ;
This cell's my court : here have I few attendants 
And subjects none abroad : pray you , look in .
My dukedom since you have given me again ,
I will requite you with as good a thing ;
At least bring forth a wonder , to content ye 
As much as me my dukedom .


Sweet lord , you play me false .

No , my dearest love ,
I would not for the world .

Yes , for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle ,
And I would call it fair play .

If this prove 
A vision of the island , one dear son 
Shall I twice lose .

A most high miracle !

Though the seas threaten , they are merciful :
I have curs'd them without cause .


Now , all the blessings 
Of a glad father compass thee about !
Arise , and say how thou cam'st here .

O , wonder !
How many goodly creatures are there here !
How beauteous mankind is ! O brave new world ,
That has such people in't !

'Tis new to thee .

What is this maid , with whom thou wast at play ?
Your eld'st acquaintance cannot be three hours :
Is she the goddess that hath sever'd us ,
And brought us thus together ?

Sir , she is mortal ;
But by immortal Providence she's mine ;
I chose her when I could not ask my father 
For his advice , nor thought I had one . She 
Is daughter to this famous Duke of Milan ,
Of whom so often I have heard renown ,
But never saw before ; of whom I have 
Receiv'd a second life ; and second father 
This lady makes him to me .

I am hers :
But O ! how oddly will it sound that I 
Must ask my child forgiveness !

There , sir , stop :
Let us not burden our remembrances 
With a heaviness that's gone .

I have inly wept ,
Or should have spoke ere this . Look down , you gods ,
And on this couple drop a blessed crown ;
For it is you that have chalk'd forth the way 
Which brought us hither !

I say , Amen , Gonzalo !

Was Milan thrust from Milan , that his issue 
Should become kings of Naples ? O , rejoice 
Beyond a common joy , and set it down 
With gold on lasting pillars . In one voyage 
Did Claribel her husband find at Tunis ,
And Ferdinand , her brother , found a wife 
Where he himself was lost ; Prospero his dukedom 
In a poor isle ; and all of us ourselves ,
When no man was his own .

Give me your hands :
Let grief and sorrow still embrace his heart 
That doth not wish you joy !

Be it so : Amen !


O look , sir ! look , sir ! here are more of us .
I prophesied , if a gallows were on land ,
This fellow could not drown .Now , blasphemy ,
That swear'st grace o'erboard , not an oath on shore ?

Hast thou no mouth by land ? What is the news ?

The best news is that we have safely found 
Our king and company : the next , our ship ,
Which but three glasses since we gave out split ,
Is tight and yare and bravely rigg'd as when 
We first put out to sea .

Sir , all this service 
Have I done since I went .

My tricksy spirit !

These are not natural events ; they strengthen 
From strange to stranger .Say , how came you hither ?

If I did think , sir , I were well awake ,
I'd strive to tell you . We were dead of sleep ,
And ,how we know not ,all clapp'd under hatches ,
Where , but even now , with strange and several noises 
Of roaring , shrieking , howling , jingling chains ,
And mo diversity of sounds , all horrible ,
We were awak'd ; straightway , at liberty :
Where we , in all her trim , freshly beheld 
Our royal , good , and gallant ship ; our master 
Capering to eye her : on a trice , so please you ,
Even in a dream , were we divided from them ,
And were brought moping hither .

Was't well done ?

Bravely , my diligence ! Thou shalt be free .

This is as strange a maze as e'er men trod ;
And there is in this business more than nature 
Was ever conduct of : some oracle 
Must rectify our knowledge .

Sir , my liege ,
Do not infest your mind with beating on 
The strangeness of this business : at pick'd leisure 
Which shall be shortly , single I'll resolve you ,
Which to you shall seem probable ,of every 
These happen'd accidents ; till when , be cheerful ,
And think of each thing well .

Come hither , spirit ;
Set Caliban and his companions free ;
Untie the spell .

How fares my gracious sir ?
There are yet missing of your company 
Some few odd lads that you remember not .


Every man shift for all the rest , and let no man take care for himself , for all is but fortune .Coragio ! bully-monster , Coragio !

If these be true spies which I wear in my head , here's a goodly sight .

O Setebos ! these be brave spirits , indeed .
How fine my master is ! I am afraid 
He will chastise me .

Ha , ha !
What things are these , my lord Antonio ?
Will money buy them ?

Very like ; one of them 
Is a plain fish , and , no doubt , marketable .

Mark but the badges of these men , my lords ,
Then say , if they be true .This mis-shapen knave ,
His mother was a witch ; and one so strong 
That could control the moon , make flows and ebbs ,
And deal in her command without her power .
These three have robb'd me ; and this demidevil ,
For he's a bastard one ,had plotted with them 
To take my life : two of these fellows you 
Must know and own ; this thing of darkness I 
Acknowledge mine .

I shall be pinch'd to death 

Is not this Stephano , my drunken butler ?

He is drunk now : where had he wine ?

And Trinculo is reeling-ripe : where should they 
Find this grand liquor that hath gilded them ?
How cam'st thou in this pickle ?

I have been in such a pickle since I saw you last that , I fear me , will never out of my bones : I shall not fear fly-blowing .

Why , how now , Stephano !

O ! touch me not : I am not Stephano , but a cramp .

You'd be king of the isle , sirrah ?

I should have been a sore one then .

This is a strange thing as e'er I look'd on .


He is as disproportion'd in his manners As in his shape .Go , sirrah , to my cell ;
Take with you your companions : as you look 
To have my pardon , trim it handsomely .

Ay , that I will ; and I'll be wise hereafter ,
And seek for grace . What a thrice-double ass 
Was I , to take this drunkard for a god ,
And worship this dull fool !

Go to ; away !

Hence , and bestow your luggage where you found it .

Or stole it , rather .


Sir , I invite your highness and your train 
To my poor cell , where you shall take your rest 
For this one night ; which part of it I'll waste 
With such discourse as , I not doubt , shall make it 
Go quick away ; the story of my life 
And the particular accidents gone by 
Since I came to this isle : and in the morn 
I'll bring you to your ship , and so to Naples ,
Where I have hope to see the nuptial 
Of these our dear-beloved solemniz'd ;
And thence retire me to my Milan , where 
Every third thought shall be my grave .

I long 
To hear the story of your life , which must 
Take the ear strangely .

I'll deliver all ;
And promise you calm seas , auspicious gales 
And sail so expeditious that shall catch 
Your royal fleet far off .

My Ariel , chick ,
That is thy charge : then to the elements 
Be free , and fare thou well !Please you , draw near .

Now my charms are all o'erthrown ,
And what strength I have's mine own ;
Which is most faint : now , 'tis true ,
I must be here confin'd by you ,
Or sent to Naples Let me not ,
Since I have my dukedom got 
And pardon'd the deceiver , dwell 
In this bare island by your spell ;
But release me from my bands 
With the help of your good hands .
Gentle breath of yours my sails 
Must fill , or else my project fails ,
Which was to please . Now I want 
Spirits to enforce , art to enchant ;
And my ending is despair ,
Unless I be reliev'd by prayer ,
Which pierces so that it assaults 
Mercy itself and frees all faults .
As you from crimes would pardon'd be ,
Let your indulgence set me free .

THE TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA

Cease to persuade , my loving Proteus :
Home-keeping youth have ever homely wits .
Were't not affection chains thy tender days 
To the sweet glances of thy honour'd love ,
I rather would entreat thy company 
To see the wonders of the world abroad 
Than , living dully sluggardiz'd at home ,
Wear out thy youth with shapeless idleness .
But since thou lov'st , love still , and thrive therein ,
Even as I would when I to love begin .

Wilt thou be gone ? Sweet Valentine , adieu !
Think on thy Proteus , when thou haply seest 
Some rare note-worthy object in thy travel :
Wish me partaker in thy happiness 
When thou dost meet good hap ; and in thy danger ,
If ever danger do environ thee ,
Commend thy grievance to my holy prayers ,
For I will be thy beadsman , Valentine .

And on a love-book pray for my success ?

Upon some book I love I'll pray for thee .

That's on some shallow story of deep love ,
How young Leander cross'd the Hellespont .

That's a deep story of a deeper love ;
For he was more than over shoes in love .

'Tis true ; for you are over boots in love ,
And yet you never swum the Hellespont .

Over the boots ? nay , give me not the boots .

No , I will not , for it boots thee not .

What ?

To be in love , where scorn is bought with groans ;
Coy looks with heart-sore sighs ; one fading moment's mirth 
With twenty watchful , weary , tedious nights :
If haply won , perhaps a hapless gain ;
If lost , why then a grievous labour won :
However , but a folly bought with wit ,
Or else a wit by folly vanquished .

So , by your circumstance , you call me fool .

So , by your circumstance , I fear you'll prove .

'Tis love you cavil at : I am not Love .

Love is your master , for he masters you ;
And he that is so yoked by a fool ,
Methinks , should not be chronicled for wise .

Yet writers say , as in the sweetest bud 
The eating canker dwells , so eating love 
Inhabits in the finest wits of all .

And writers say , as the most forward bud 
Is eaten by the canker ere it blow ,
Even so by love the young and tender wit 
Is turned to folly ; blasting in the bud ,
Losing his verdure even in the prime ,
And all the fair effects of future hopes .
But wherefore waste I time to counsel thee 
That art a votary to fond desire ?
Once more adieu ! my father at the road 
Expects my coming , there to see me shipp'd .

And thither will I bring thee , Valentine .

Sweet Proteus , no ; now let us take our leave .
To Milan let me hear from thee by letters 
Of thy success in love , and what news else 
Betideth here in absence of thy friend ;
And I likewise will visit thee with mine .

All happiness bechance to thee in Milan !

As much to you at home ! and so , farewell .


He after honour hunts , I after love :
He leaves his friends to dignify them more ;
I leave myself , my friends and all , for love .
Thou , Julia , thou hast metamorphos'd me ;
Made me neglect my studies , lose my time ,
War with good counsel , set the world at nought ;
Made wit with musing weak , heart sick with thought .


Sir Proteus , save you ! Saw you my master ?

But now he parted hence , to embark for Milan .

Twenty to one , then , he is shipp'd already ,
And I have play'd the sheep , in losing him .

Indeed , a sheep doth very often stray ,
An if the shepherd be a while away .

You conclude that my master is a shepherd , then , and I a sheep ?

I do .

Why then my horns are his horns , whether I wake or sleep .

A silly answer , and fitting well a sheep .

This proves me still a sheep .

True , and thy master a shepherd .

Nay , that I can deny by a circumstance .

It shall go hard but I'll prove it by another .

The shepherd seeks the sheep , and not the sheep the shepherd ; but I seek my master , and my master seeks not me : therefore I am no sheep .

The sheep for fodder follow the shepherd , the shepherd for food follows not the sheep ; thou for wages followest thy master , thy master for wages follows not thee : therefore thou art a sheep .

Such another proof will make me cry 'baa .' 

But , dost thou hear ? gavest thou my letter to Julia ?

Ay , sir : I , a lost mutton , gave your letter to her , a laced mutton ; and she , a laced mutton , gave me , a lost mutton , nothing for my labour .

Here's too small a pasture for such store of muttons .

If the ground be overcharged , you were best stick her .

Nay , in that you are astray ; 'twere best pound you .

Nay , sir , less than a pound shall serve me for carrying your letter .

You mistake : I mean the pound ,a pinfold .

From a pound to a pin ? fold it over and over ,
'Tis threefold too little for carrying a letter to your lover .

But what said she ?

Did she nod ?

Ay .

Nod , ay ? why , that's noddy .

You mistook , sir : I say she did nod ; and you ask me if she did nod ; and I say , Ay .

And that set together is noddy .

Now you have taken the pains to set it together , take it for your pains .

No , no ; you shall have it for bearing the letter .

Well , I perceive I must be fain to bear with you .

Why , sir , how do you bear with me ?

Marry , sir , the letter very orderly ; having nothing but the word 'noddy' for my pains .

Beshrew me , but you have a quick wit .

And yet it cannot overtake your slow purse .

Come , come ; open the matter in brief : what said she ?

Open your purse , that the money and the matter may be both at once delivered .

Well , sir , here is for your pains 

What said she ?

Truly , sir , I think you'll hardly win her .

Why ? couldst thou perceive so much from her ?

Sir , I could perceive nothing at all from her ; no , not so much as a ducat for delivering your letter . And being so hard to me that brought your mind , I fear she'll prove as hard to you in telling your mind . Give her no token but stones , for she's as hard as steel .

What ! said she nothing ?

No , not so much as 'Take this for thy pains .' To testify your bounty , I thank you , you have testerned me ; in requital whereof , henceforth carry your letters yourself . And so , sir , I'll commend you to my master .

Go , go , be gone , to save your ship from wrack ;
Which cannot perish , having thee aboard ,
Being destin'd to a drier death on shore .

I must go send some better messenger :
I fear my Julia would not deign my lines ,
Receiving them from such a worthless post .


But say , Lucetta , now we are alone ,
Wouldst thou then counsel me to fall in love ?

Ay , madam , so you stumble not unheedfully .

Of all the fair resort of gentlemen 
That every day with parle encounter me ,
In thy opinion which is worthiest love ?

Please you repeat their names , I'll show my mind 
According to my shallow simple skill .

What think'st thou of the fair Sir Eglamour ?

As of a knight well-spoken , neat and fine ;
But , were I you , he never should be mine .

What think'st thou of the rich Mercatio ?

Well of his wealth ; but of himself , so so .

What think'st thou of the gentle Proteus ?

Lord , Lord ! to see what folly reigns in us !

How now ! what means this passion at his name ?

Pardon , dear madam ; 'tis a passing shame 
That I , unworthy body as I am ,
Should censure thus on lovely gentlemen .

Why not on Proteus , as of all the rest ?

Then thus ,of many good I think him best .

Your reason ?

I have no other but a woman's reason :
I think him so because I think him so .

And wouldst thou have me cast my love on him ?

Ay , if you thought your love not cast away .

Why , he , of all the rest hath never mov'd me .

Yet he of all the rest , I think , best loves ye .

His little speaking shows his love but small .

Fire that's closest kept burns most of all .

They do not love that do not show their love .

O ! they love least that let men know their love .

I would I knew his mind .

Peruse this paper , madam .


'To Julia .' Say from whom ?

That the contents will show .

Say , say , who gave it thee ?

Sir Valentine's page , and sent , I think , from Proteus .
He would have given it you , but I , being in the way ,
Did in your name receive it ; pardon the fault , I pray .

Now , by my modesty , a goodly broker !
Dare you presume to harbour wanton lines ?
To whisper and conspire against my youth ?
Now , trust me , 'tis an office of great worth 
And you an officer fit for the place .
There , take the paper : see it be return'd ;
Or else return no more into my sight .

To plead for love deserves more fee than hate .

Will ye be gone ?

That you may ruminate .


And yet I would I had o'erlook'd the letter .
It were a shame to call her back again 
And pray her to a fault for which I chid her .
What fool is she , that knows I am a maid ,
And would not force the letter to my view !
Since maids , in modesty , say 'No' to that 
Which they would have the profferer construe 'Ay .' 
Fie , fie ! how wayward is this foolish love 
That , like a testy babe , will scratch the nurse 
And presently all humbled kiss the rod !
How churlishly I child Lucetta hence ,
When willingly I would have had her here :
How angerly I taught my brow to frown ,
When inward joy enforc'd my heart to smile .
My penance is , to call Lucetta back 
And ask remission for my folly past .
What ho ! Lucetta !


What would your ladyship ?

Is it near dinner-time ?

I would it were ;
That you might kill your stomach on your meat 
And not upon your maid .

What is't that you took up so gingerly ?

Nothing .

Why didst thou stoop , then ?

To take a paper up 
That I let fall .

And is that paper nothing ?

Nothing concerning me .

Then let it lie for those that it concerns .

Madam , it will not lie where it concerns ,
Unless it have a false interpreter .

Some love of yours hath writ to you in rime .

That I might sing it , madam , to a tune :
Give me a note : your ladyship can set .

As little by such toys as may be possible ;
Best sing it to the tune of 'Light o' Love .' 

It is too heavy for so light a tune .

Heavy ! belike it hath some burden , then ?

Ay ; and melodious were it , would you sing it .

And why not you ?

I cannot reach so high .

Let's see your song .

How now , minion !

Keep tune there still , so you will sing it out :
And yet methinks , I do not like this tune .

You do not ?

No , madam ; it is too sharp .

You , minion , are too saucy .

Nay , now you are too flat 
And mar the concord with too harsh a descant :
There wanteth but a mean to fill your song .

The mean is drown'd with your unruly bass .

Indeed , I bid the base for Proteus .

This babble shall not henceforth trouble me .
Here is a coil with protestation !

Go , get you gone , and let the papers lie :
You would be fingering them , to anger me .

She makes it strange ; but she would be best pleas'd 
To be so anger'd with another letter .


Nay , would I were so anger'd with the same !
O hateful hands , to tear such loving words !
Injurious wasps , to feed on such sweet honey 
And kill the bees that yield it with your stings !
I'll kiss each several paper for amends .
Look , here is writ 'kind Julia :' unkind Julia !
As in revenge of thy ingratitude ,
I throw thy name against the bruising stones ,
Trampling contemptuously on thy disdain .
And here is writ 'love-wounded Proteus :' 
Poor wounded name ! my bosom , as a bed 
Shall lodge thee till thy wound be throughly heal'd ;
And thus I search it with a sovereign kiss .
But twice or thrice was 'Proteus' written down :
Be calm , good wind , blow not a word away 
Till I have found each letter in the letter ,
Except mine own name ; that some whirlwind bear 
Unto a ragged , fearful hanging rock ,
And throw it thence into the raging sea !
Lo ! here in one line is his name twice writ ,
'Poor forlorn Proteus , passionate Proteus ,
To the sweet Julia' :that I'll tear away ;
And yet I will not , sith so prettily 
He couples it to his complaining names :
Thus will I fold them one upon another :
Now kiss , embrace , contend , do what you will .


Madam ,
Dinner is ready , and your father stays .

Well , let us go .

What ! shall these papers he like tell-tales here ?

If you respect them , best to take them up .

Nay , I was taken up for laying them down ;
Yet here they shall not lie , for catching cold .

I see you have a month's mind to them .

Ay , madam , you may say what sights you see ;
I see things too , although you judge I wink .

Come , come ; will't please you go ?


Tell me , Panthino , what sad talk was that 
Wherewith my brother held you in the cloister ?

'Twas of his nephew Proteus , your son .

Why , what of him ?

He wonder'd that your lordship 
Would suffer him to spend his youth at home ,
While other men , of slender reputation ,
Put forth their sons to seek preferment out :
Some to the wars , to try their fortune there ;
Some to discover islands far away ;
Some to the studious universities .
For any or for all these exercises 
He said that Proteus your son was meet ,
And did request me to importune you 
To let him spend his time no more at home ,
Which would be great impeachment to his age ,
In having known to travel in his youth .

Nor need'st thou much importune me to that 
Whereon this month I have been hammering .
I have consider'd well his loss of time ,
And how he cannot be a perfect man ,
Not being tried and tutor'd in the world :
Experience is by industry achiev'd 
And perfected by the swift course of time .
Then tell me , whither were I best to send him ?

I think your lordship is not ignorant 
How his companion , youthful Valentine ,
Attends the emperor in his royal court .

I know it well .

'Twere good , I think , your lordship sent him thither :
There shall be practise tilts and tournaments ,
Hear sweet discourse , converse with noblemen ,
And be in eye of every exercise 
Worthy his youth and nobleness of birth .

I like thy counsel , well hast thou advis'd :
And that thou mayst perceive how well I like it 
The execution of it shall make known .
Even with the speediest expedition 
I will dispatch him to the emperor's court .

To-morrow , may it please you , Don Alphonso 
With other gentlemen of good esteem ,
Are journeying to salute the emperor 
And to commend their service to his will .

Good company ; with them shall Proteus go :
And in good time :now will we break with him .


Sweet love ! sweet lines ! sweet life !
Here is her hand , the agent of her heart ;
Here is her oath for love , her honour's pawn .
O ! that our fathers would applaud our loves ,
To seal our happiness with their consents !
O heavenly Julia !

How now ! what letter are you reading there ?

May't please your lordship , 'tis a word or two 
Of commendations sent from Valentine ,
Deliver'd by a friend that came from him .

Lend me the letter ; let me see what news .

There is no news , my lord ; but that he writes 
How happily he lives , how well belov'd 
And daily graced by the emperor ;
Wishing me with him , partner of his fortune .

And how stand you affected to his wish ?

As one relying on your lordship's will 
And not depending on his friendly wish .

My will is something sorted with his wish .
Muse not that I thus suddenly proceed ;
For what I will , I will , and there an end .
I am resolv'd that thou shalt spend some time 
With Valentinus in the emperor's court :
What maintenance he from his friends receives ,
Like exhibition thou shalt have from me .
To-morrow be in readiness to go :
Excuse it not , for I am peremptory .

My lord , I cannot be so soon provided :
Please you , deliberate a day or two .

Look , what thou want'st shall be sent after thee :
No more of stay ; to-morrow thou must go .
Come on , Panthino : you shall be employ'd 
To hasten on his expedition .


Thus have I shunn'd the fire for fear of burning ,
And drench'd me in the sea , where I am drown'd .
I fear'd to show my father Julia's letter ,
Lest he should take exceptions to my love ;
And with the vantage of mine own excuse 
Hath he excepted most against my love .
O ! how this spring of love resembleth 
The uncertain glory of an April day ,
Which now shows all the beauty of the sun ,
And by and by a cloud takes all away !


Sir Proteus , your father calls for you :
He is in haste ; therefore , I pray you , go .

Why , this it is : my heart accords thereto ,
And yet a thousand times it answers , 'no .' 

Sir , your glove .


Not mine ; my gloves are on .

Why , then this may be yours , for this is but one .

Ha ! let me see : ay , give it me , it's mine ;
Sweet ornament that decks a thing divine !
Ah Silvia ! Silvia !

Madam Silvia ! Madam Silvia !

How now , sirrah ?

She is not within hearing , sir .

Why , sir , who bade you call her ?

Your worship , sir ; or else I mistook .

Well , you'll still be too forward .

And yet I was last chidden for being too slow .

Go to , sir . Tell me , do you know Madam Silvia ?

She that your worship loves ?

Why , how know you that I am in love ?

Marry , by these special marks : first , you have learned , like Sir Proteus , to wreathe your arms , like a malecontent ; to relish a love-song , like a robin-redbreast ; to walk alone , like one that had the pestilence ; to sigh , like a schoolboy that had lost his A B C ; to weep , like a young wench that had buried her grandam ; to fast , like one that takes diet ; to watch , like one that fears robbing ; to speak puling , like a beggar at Hallowmas . You were wont , when you laughed , to crow like a cock ; when you walked , to walk like one of the lions ; when you fasted , it was presently after dinner ; when you looked sadly , it was for want of money : and now you are metamorphosed with a mistress , that , when I look on you , I can hardly think you my master .

Are all these things perceived in me ?

They are all perceived without ye .

Without me ? they cannot .

Without you ? nay , that's certain ; for , without you were so simple , none else would : but you are so without these follies , that these follies are within you and shine through you like the water in an urinal , that not an eye that sees you but is a physician to comment on your malady .

But tell me , dost thou know my lady Silvia ?

She that you gaze on so as she sits at supper ?

Hast thou observed that ? even she , I mean .

Why , sir , I know her not .

Dost thou know her by my gazing on her , and yet knowest her not ?

Is she not hard-favoured , sir ?

Not so fair , boy , as well-favoured .

Sir , I know that well enough .

What dost thou know ?

That she is not so fair , as , of you , well-favoured .

I mean that her beauty is exquisite , but her favour infinite .

That's because the one is painted and the other out of all count .

How painted ? and how out of count ?

Marry , sir , so painted to make her fair , that no man counts of her beauty .

How esteemest thou me ? I account of her beauty .

You never saw her since she was deformed .

How long hath she been deformed ?

Ever since you loved her .

I have loved her ever since I saw her , and still I see her beautiful .

If you love her you cannot see her .

Why ?

Because Love is blind . O ! that you had mine eyes ; or your own eyes had the lights they were wont to have when you chid at Sir Proteus for going ungartered !

What should I see then ?

Your own present folly and her passing deformity : for he , being in love , could not see to garter his hose ; and you , being in love , cannot see to put on your hose .

Belike , boy , then , you are in love ; for last morning you could not see to wipe my shoes .

True , sir ; I was in love with my bed . I thank you , you swinged me for my love , which makes me the bolder to chide you for yours .

In conclusion , I stand affected to her .

I would you were set , so your affection would cease .

Last night she enjoined me to write some lines to one she loves .

And have you ?

I have .

Are they not lamely writ ?

No , boy , but as well as I can do them .
Peace ! here she comes .


O excellent motion ! O exceeding puppet ! now will he interpret to her .

Madam and mistress , a thousand good morrows .

O ! give ye good even : here's a million of manners .

Sir Valentine and servant , to you two thousand .

He should give her interest , and she gives it him .

As you enjoin'd me , I have writ your letter 
Unto the secret nameless friend of yours ;
Which I was much unwilling to proceed in 
But for my duty to your ladyship .


I thank you , gentle servant . 'Tis very clerkly done .

Now , trust me , madam , it came hardly off ;
For , being ignorant to whom it goes 
I writ at random , very doubtfully .

Perchance you think too much of so much pains ?

No , madam ; so it stead you , I will write ,
Please you command , a thousand times as much .
And yet 

A pretty period ! Well , I guess the sequel ;
And yet I will not name it ; and yet I care not ;
And yet take this again ; and yet I thank you ,
Meaning henceforth to trouble you no more .

And yet you will ; and yet another yet .

What means your ladyship ? do you not like it ?

Yes , yes : the lines are very quaintly writ ,
But since unwillingly , take them again :
Nay , take them .


Madam , they are for you .

Ay , ay ; you writ them , sir , at my request ,
But I will none of them ; they are for you .
I would have had them writ more movingly .

Please you , I'll write your ladyship another .

And when it's writ , for my sake read it over :
And if it please you , so ; if not , why , so .

If it please me , madam , what then ?

Why , if it please you , take it for your labour :
And so , good morrow , servant .


O jest unseen , inscrutable , invisible ,
As a nose on a man's face , or a weathercock on a steeple !
My master sues to her , and she hath taught her suitor ,
He being her pupil , to become her tutor .
O excellent device ! was there ever heard a better ,
That my master , being scribe , to himself should write the letter ?

How now , sir ! what are you reasoning with yourself ?

Nay , I was riming : 'tis you that have the reason .

To do what ?

To be a spokesman from Madam Silvia .

To whom ?

To yourself . Why , she wooes you by a figure .

What figure ?

By a letter , I should say .

Why , she hath not writ to me ?

What need she , when she hath made you write to yourself ? Why , do you not perceive the jest ?

No , believe me .

No believing you , indeed , sir . But did you perceive her earnest ?

She gave me none , except an angry word .

Why , she hath given you a letter .

That's the letter I writ to her friend .

And that letter hath she delivered , and there an end .

I would it were no worse .

I'll warrant you , 'tis as well :
'For often have you writ to her , and she , in modesty ,
Or else for want of idle time , could not again reply ;
Or fearing else some messenger that might her mind discover ,
Herself hath taught her love himself to write unto her lover .' 
All this I speak in print , for in print I found it .
Why muse you , sir ? 'tis dinner-time .

I have dined .

Ay , but hearken , sir : though the chameleon Love can feed on the air , I am one that am nourished by my victuals and would fain have meat . O ! be not like your mistress : be moved , be moved .


Have patience , gentle Julia .

I must , where is no remedy .

When possibly I can , I will return .

If you turn not , you will return the sooner .
Keep this remembrance for thy Julia's sake .


Why , then , we'll make exchange : here , take you this .


And seal the bargain with a holy kiss .

Here is my hand for my true constancy ;
And when that hour o'erslips me in the day 
Wherein I sigh not , Julia , for thy sake ,
The next ensuing hour some foul mischance 
Torment me for my love's forgetfulness !
My father stays my coming ; answer not .
The tide is now : nay , not thy tide of tears ;
That tide will stay me longer than I should .
Julia , farewell .

What ! gone without a word ?
Ay , so true love should do : it cannot speak ;
For truth hath better deeds than words to grace it .


Sir Proteus , you are stay'd for .

Go ; I come , I come .
Alas ! this parting strikes poor lovers dumb .


Nay , 'twill be this hour ere I have done weeping : all the kind of the Launces have this very fault . I have received my proportion , like the prodigious son , and am going with Sir Proteus to the imperial's court . I think Crab my dog be the sourest-natured dog that lives : my mother weeping , my father wailing , my sister crying , our maid howling , our cat wringing her hands , and all our house in a great perplexity , yet did not this cruel-hearted cur shed one tear . He is a stone , a very pebble stone , and has no more pity in him than a dog ; a Jew would have wept to have seen our parting : why , my grandam , having no eyes , look you , wept herself blind at my parting . Nay , I'll show you the manner of it . This shoe is my father ; no , this left shoe is my father : no , no , this left shoe is my mother ; nay , that cannot be so neither :yes , it is so ; it is so ; it hath the worser sole . This shoe , with the hole in , is my mother , and this my father . A vengeance on't ! there 'tis : now , sir , this staff is my sister ; for , look you , she is as white as a lily and as small as a wand : this hat is Nan , our maid : I am the dog ; no , the dog is himself , and I am the dog ,O ! the dog is me , and I am myself : ay , so , so . Now come I to my father ; 'Father , your blessing ;' now should not the shoe speak a word for weeping : now should I kiss my father ; well , he weeps on . Now come I to my mother ;O , that she could speak now like a wood woman ! Well , I kiss her ; why , there 'tis ; here's my mother's breath up and down . Now come I to my sister ; mark the moan she makes : Now the dog all this while sheds not a tear nor speaks a word ; but see how I lay the dust with my tears .


Launce , away , away , aboard ! thy master is shipped , and thou art to post after with oars . What's the matter ? why weepest thou , man ? Away , ass ! you'll lose the tide if you tarry any longer .

It is no matter if the tied were lost ; for it is the unkindest tied that ever any man tied .

What's the unkindest tide ?

Why , he that's tied here , Crab , my dog .

Tut , man , I mean thou'lt lose the flood ; and , in losing the flood , lose thy voyage , and , in losing thy voyage , lose thy master ; and , in losing thy master , lose thy service ; and , in losing thy service ,Why dost thou stop my mouth ?

For fear thou shouldst lose thy tongue .

Where should I lose my tongue ?

In thy tale .

In thy tail !

Lose the tide , and the voyage , and the master , and the service , and the tied ! Why , man , if the river were dry , I am able to fill it with my tears ; if the wind were down , I could drive the boat with my sighs .

Come , come away , man ; I was sent to call thee .

Sir , call me what thou darest .

Wilt thou go ?

Well , I will go .


Servant !

Mistress ?

Master , Sir Thurio frowns on you .

Ay , boy , it's for love .

Not of you .

Of my mistress , then .

'Twere good you knock'd him .

Servant , you are sad .

Indeed , madam , I seem so .

Seem you that you are not ?

Haply I do .

So do counterfeits .

So do you .

What seem I that I am not ?

Wise .

What instance of the contrary ?

Your folly .

And how quote you my folly ?

I quote it in your jerkin .

My jerkin is a doublet .

Well , then , I'll double your folly .

How ?

What , angry , Sir Thurio ! do you change colour ?

Give him leave , madam ; he is a kind of chameleon .

That hath more mind to feed on your blood than live in your air .

You have said , sir .

Ay , sir , and done too , for this time .

I know it well , sir : you always end ere you begin .

A fine volley of words , gentlemen , and quickly shot off .

'Tis indeed , madam ; we thank the giver .

Who is that , servant ?

Yourself , sweet lady ; for you gave the fire . Sir Thurio borrows his wit from your ladyship's looks , and spends what he borrows kindly in your company .

Sir , if you spend word for word with me , I shall make your wit bankrupt .

I know it well , sir : you have an exchequer of words , and , I think , no other treasure to give your followers ; for it appears by their bare liveries that they live by your bare words .

No more , gentlemen , no more . Here comes my father .


Now , daughter Silvia , you are hard beset .
Sir Valentine , your father's in good health :
What say you to a letter from your friends 
Of much good news ?

My lord , I will be thankful 
To any happy messenger from thence .

Know ye Don Antonio , your countryman ?

Ay , my good lord ; I know the gentleman 
To be of worth and worthy estimation ,
And not without desert so well reputed .

Hath he not a son ?

Ay , my good lord ; a son that well deserves 
The honour and regard of such a father .

You know him well ?

I know him as myself ; for from our infancy 
We have convers'd and spent our hours together :
And though myself have been an idle truant ,
Omitting the sweet benefit of time 
To clothe mine age with angel-like perfection ,
Yet hath Sir Proteus ,for that's his name ,
Made use and fair advantage of his days :
His years but young , but his experience old ;
His head unmellow'd , but his judgment ripe ;
And , in a word ,for far behind his worth 
Come all the praises that I now bestow ,
He is complete in feature and in mind 
With all good grace to grace a gentleman .

Beshrew me , sir , but if he make this good ,
He is as worthy for an empress' love 
As meet to be an emperor's counsellor .
Well , sir , this gentleman is come to me 
With commendation from great potentates ;
And here he means to spend his time awhile :
I think , 'tis no unwelcome news to you .

Should I have wish'd a thing , it had been he .

Welcome him then according to his worth .
Silvia , I speak to you ; and you , Sir Thurio :
For Valentine , I need not cite him to it .
I'll send him hither to you presently .


This is the gentleman I told your ladyship 
Had come along with me , but that his mistress 
Did hold his eyes lock'd in her crystal looks .

Belike that now she hath enfranchis'd them 
Upon some other pawn for fealty .

Nay , sure , I think she holds them prisoners still .

Nay , then he should be blind ; and , being blind ,
How could he see his way to seek out you ?

Why , lady , Love hath twenty pairs of eyes .

They say that Love hath not an eye at all .

To see such lovers , Thurio , as yourself :
Upon a homely object Love can wink .

Have done , have done . Here comes the gentleman .


Welcome , dear Proteus ! Mistress , I beseech you ,
Confirm his welcome with some special favour .

His worth is warrant for his welcome hither ,
If this be he you oft have wish'd to hear from .

Mistress , it is : sweet lady , entertain him 
To be my fellow-servant to your ladyship .

Too low a mistress for so high a servant .

Not so , sweet lady ; but too mean a servant 
To have a look of such a worthy mistress .

Leave off discourse of disability :
Sweet lady , entertain him for your servant .

My duty will I boast of , nothing else .

And duty never yet did want his meed .
Servant , you are welcome to a worthless mistress .

I'll die on him that says so but yourself .

That you are welcome ?

That you are worthless .


Madam , my lord your father would speak with you .

I wait upon his pleasure .

Come , Sir Thurio ,
Go with me . Once more , new servant , welcome :
I'll leave you to confer of home-affairs ;
When you have done , we look to hear from you .

We'll both attend upon your ladyship .


Now , tell me , how do all from whence you came ?

Your friends are well and have them much commended .

And how do yours ?

I left them all in health .

How does your lady and how thrives your love ?

My tales of love were wont to weary you ;
I know you joy not in a love-discourse .

Ay , Proteus , but that life is alter'd now :
I have done penance for contemning love ;
Whose high imperious thoughts have punish'd me 
With bitter fasts , with penitential groans ,
With nightly tears and daily heart-sore sighs ;
For , in revenge of my contempt of love ,
Love hath chas'd sleep from my enthralled eyes ,
And made them watchers of mine own heart's sorrow .
O , gentle Proteus ! Love's a mighty lord ,
And hath so humbled me as I confess ,
There is no woe to his correction ,
Nor to his service no such joy on earth .
Now no discourse , except it be of love ;
Now can I break my fast , dine , sup and sleep ,
Upon the very naked name of love .

Enough ; I read your fortune in your eye .
Was this the idol that you worship so ?

Even she ; and is she not a heavenly saint ?

No ; but she is an earthly paragon .

Call her divine .

I will not flatter her .

O ! flatter me , for love delights in praises .

When I was sick you gave me bitter pills ,
And I must minister the like to you .

Then speak the truth by her ; if not divine ,
Yet let her be a principality ,
Sovereign to all the creatures on the earth .

Except my mistress .

Sweet , except not any ,
Except thou wilt except against my love .

Have I not reason to prefer mine own ?

And I will help thee to prefer her too :
She shall be dignified with this high honour ,
To bear my lady's train , lest the base earth 
Should from her vesture chance to steal a kiss ,
And , of so great a favour growing proud ,
Disdain to root the summer-swelling flower ,
And make rough winter everlastingly .

Why , Valentine , what braggardism is this ?

Pardon me , Proteus : all I can is nothing 
To her whose worth makes other worthies nothing .
She is alone .

Then , let her alone .

Not for the world : why , man , she is mine own ,
And I as rich in having such a jewel 
As twenty seas , if all their sand were pearl ,
The water nectar , and the rocks pure gold .
Forgive me that I do not dream on thee ,
Because thou see'st me dote upon my love .
My foolish rival , that her father likes 
Only for his possessions are so huge ,
Is gone with her along , and I must after ,
For love , thou know'st , is full of jealousy .

But she loves you ?

Ay , and we are betroth'd : nay , more , our marriage-hour ,
With all the cunning manner of our flight ,
Determin'd of : how I must climb her window ,
The ladder made of cords , and all the means 
Plotted and 'greed on for my happiness .
Good Proteus , go with me to my chamber ,
In these affairs to aid me with thy counsel .

Go on before , I shall inquire you forth :
I must unto the road , to disembark 
Some necessaries that I needs must use ,
And then I'll presently attend you .

Will you make haste ?

I will .

Even as one heat another heat expels ,
Or as one nail by strength drives out another ,
So the remembrance of my former love 
Is by a newer object quite forgotten .
Is it mine eye , or Valentinus' praise ,
Her true perfection , or my false transgression ,
That makes me reasonless to reason thus ?
She's fair ; and so is Julia that I love ,
That I did love , for now my love is thaw'd ,
Which , like a waxen image 'gainst a fire ,
Bears no impression of the thing it was .
Methinks my zeal to Valentine is cold ,
And that I love him not as I was wont :
O ! but I love his lady too-too much ;
And that's the reason I love him so little .
How shall I dote on her with more advice ,
That thus without advice begin to love her ?
'Tis but her picture I have yet beheld ,
And that hath dazzled my reason's light ;
But when I look on her perfections ,
There is no reason but I shall be blind .
If I can check my erring love , I will ;
If not , to compass her I'll use my skill .


Launce ! by mine honesty , welcome to Milan !

Forswear not thyself , sweet youth , for I am not welcome . I reckon this always that a man is never undone till he be hanged ; nor never welcome to a place till some certain shot be paid and the hostess say , 'Welcome !' 

Come on , you madcap , I'll to the alehouse with you presently ; where , for one shot of five pence , thou shalt have five thousand welcomes . But , sirrah , how did thy master part with Madam Julia ?

Marry , after they closed in earnest , they parted very fairly in jest .

But shall she marry him ?

No .

How then ? Shall he marry her ?

No , neither .

What , are they broken ?

No , they are both as whole as a fish .

Why then , how stands the matter with them ?

Marry , thus ; when it stands well with him , it stands well with her .

What an ass art thou ! I understand thee not .

What a block art thou , that thou canst not ! My staff understands me .

What thou sayest ?

Ay , and what I do too : look thee , I'll but lean , and my staff understands me .

It stands under thee , indeed .

Why , stand-under and under-stand is all one .

But tell me true , will't be a match ?

Ask my dog : if he say ay , it will ; if he say no , it will ; if he shake his tail and say nothing , it will .

The conclusion is , then , that it will .

Thou shalt never get such a secret from me but by a parable .

'Tis well that I get it so . But , Launce , how sayest thou , that my master is become a notable lover ?

I never knew him otherwise .

Than how ?

A notable lubber , as thou reportest him to be .

Why , thou whoreson ass , thou mistakest me .

Why , fool , I meant not thee ; I meant thy master .

I tell thee , my master is become a hot lover .

Why , I tell thee , I care not though he burn himself in love . If thou wilt go with me to the alehouse so ; if not , thou art a Hebrew , a Jew , and not worth the name of a Christian .

Why ?

Because thou hast not so much charity in thee as to go to the ale with a Christian . Wilt thou go ?

At thy service .


To leave my Julia , shall I be forsworn ;
To love fair Silvia , shall I be forsworn ;
To wrong my friend , I shall be much forsworn ;
And even that power which gave me first my oath 
Provokes me to this threefold perjury :
Love bade me swear , and Love bids me forswear .
O sweet-suggesting Love ! if thou hast sinn'd ,
Teach me , thy tempted subject , to excuse it .
At first I did adore a twinkling star ,
But now I worship a celestial sun .
Unheedful vows may heedfully be broken ;
And he wants wit that wants resolved will 
To learn his wit to exchange the bad for better .
Fie , fie , unreverend tongue ! to call her bad ,
Whose sovereignty so oft thou hast preferr'd 
With twenty thousand soul-confirming oaths .
I cannot leave to love , and yet I do ;
But there I leave to love where I should love .
Julia I lose and Valentine I lose :
If I keep them , I needs must lose myself ;
If I lose them , thus find I by their loss ,
For Valentine , myself ; for Julia , Silvia .
I to myself am dearer than a friend ,
For love is still most precious in itself ;
And Silvia witness heaven that made her fair !
Shows Julia but a swarthy Ethiope .
I will forget that Julia is alive ,
Remembering that my love to her is dead ;
And Valentine I'll hold an enemy ,
Aiming at Silvia as a sweeter friend .
I cannot now prove constant to myself 
Without some treachery us'd to Valentine :
This night he meaneth with a corded ladder 
To climb celestial Silvia's chamber-window ,
Myself in counsel , his competitor .
Now presently , I'll give her father notice 
Of their disguising and pretended flight ;
Who , all enrag'd , will banish Valentine ;
For Thurio , he intends , shall wed his daughter ;
But , Valentine being gone , I'll quickly cross ,
By some sly trick blunt Thurio's dull proceeding .
Love , lend me wings to make my purpose swift ,
As thou hast lent me wit to plot this drift !


Counsel , Lucetta ; gentle girl , assist me :
And e'en in kind love I do conjure thee ,
Who art the table wherein all my thoughts 
Are visibly character'd and engrav'd ,
To lesson me and tell me some good mean 
How , with my honour , I may undertake 
A journey to my loving Proteus .

Alas ! the way is wearisome and long .

A true-devoted pilgrim is not weary 
To measure kingdoms with his feeble steps ;
Much less shall she that hath Love's wings to fly ,
And when the flight is made to one so dear ,
Of such divine perfection , as Sir Proteus .

Better forbear till Proteus make return .

O ! know'st thou not his looks are my soul's food ?
Pity the dearth that I have pined in ,
By longing for that food so long a time .
Didst thou but know the inly touch of love ,
Thou wouldst as soon go kindle fire with snow 
As seek to quench the fire of love with words .

I do not seek to quench your love's hot fire ,
But qualify the fire's extreme rage ,
Lest it should burn above the bounds of reason .

The more thou damm'st it up , the more it burns .
The current that with gentle murmur glides ,
Thou know'st , being stopp'd , impatiently doth rage ;
But when his fair course is not hindered ,
He makes sweet music with th' enamell'd stones ,
Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge 
He overtaketh in his pilgrimage ;
And so by many winding nooks he strays 
With willing sport , to the wild ocean .
Then let me go and hinder not my course :
I'll be as patient as a gentle stream 
And make a pastime of each weary step ,
Till the last step have brought me to my love ;
And there I'll rest , as after much turmoil 
A blessed soul doth in Elysium .

But in what habit will you go along ?

Not like a woman ; for I would prevent 
The loose encounters of lascivious men .
Gentle Lucetta , fit me with such weeds 
As may beseem some well-reputed page .

Why , then , your ladyship must cut your hair .

No , girl ; I'll knit it up in silken strings 
With twenty odd-conceited true-love knots :
To be fantastic may become a youth 
Of greater time than I shall show to be .

What fashion , madam , shall I make your breeches ?

That fits as well as 'Tell me , good my lord ,
What compass will you wear your farthingale ?' 
Why , even what fashion thou best lik'st , Lucetta .

You must needs have them with a cod-piece , madam .

Out , out , Lucetta ! that will be ill-favour'd .

A round hose , madam , now's not worth a pin ,
Unless you have a cod-piece to stick pins on .

Lucetta , as thou lov'st me , let me have 
What thou think'st meet and is most mannerly .
But tell me , wench , how will the world repute me 
For undertaking so unstaid a journey ?
I fear me , it will make me scandaliz'd .

If you think so , then stay at home and go not .

Nay , that I will not .

Then never dream on infamy , but go .
If Proteus like your journey when you come ,
No matter who's displeas'd when you are gone .
I fear me , he will scarce be pleas'd withal .

That is the least , Lucetta , of my fear :
A thousand oaths , an ocean of his tears ,
And instances of infinite of love 
Warrant me welcome to my Proteus .

All these are servants to deceitful men .

Base men , that use them to so base effect ;
But truer stars did govern Proteus' birth :
His words are bonds , his oaths are oracles ,
His love sincere , his thoughts immaculate ,
His tears pure messengers sent from his heart ,
His heart as far from fraud as heaven from earth .

Pray heaven he prove so when you come to him !

Now , as thou lov'st me , do him not that wrong 
To bear a hard opinion of his truth :
Only deserve my love by loving him ,
And presently go with me to my chamber ,
To take a note of what I stand in need of 
To furnish me upon my longing journey .
All that is mine I leave at thy dispose ,
My goods , my lands , my reputation ;
Only , in lieu thereof , dispatch me hence .
Come , answer not , but to it presently !
I am impatient of my tarriance .

Sir Thurio , give us leave , I pray , awhile ;
We have some secrets to confer about .

Now tell me , Proteus , what's your will with me ?

My gracious lord , that which I would discover 
The law of friendship bids me to conceal ;
But when I call to mind your gracious favours 
Done to me , undeserving as I am ,
My duty pricks me on to utter that 
Which else no worldly good should draw from me .
Know , worthy prince , Sir Valentine , my friend ,
This night intends to steal away your daughter :
Myself am one made privy to the plot .
I know you have determin'd to bestow her 
On Thurio , whom your gentle daughter hates ;
And should she thus be stol'n away from you 
It would be much vexation to your age .
Thus , for my duty's sake , I rather chose 
To cross my friend in his intended drift ,
Than , by concealing it , heap on your head 
A pack of sorrows which would press you down ,
Being unprevented , to your timeless grave .

Proteus , I thank thee for thine honest care ,
Which to requite , command me while I live .
This love of theirs myself have often seen ,
Haply , when they have judg'd me fast asleep ,
And oftentimes have purpos'd to forbid 
Sir Valentine her company and my court ;
But fearing lest my jealous aim might err 
And so unworthily disgrace the man ,
A rashness that I ever yet have shunn'd ,
I gave him gentle looks , thereby to find 
That which thyself hast now disclos'd to me .
And , that thou mayst perceive my fear of this ,
Knowing that tender youth is soon suggested ,
I nightly lodge her in an upper tower ,
The key whereof myself have ever kept ;
And thence she cannot be convey'd away .

Know , noble lord , they have devis'd a mean 
How he her chamber-window will ascend 
And with a corded ladder fetch her down ;
For which the youthful lover now is gone 
And this way comes he with it presently ;
Where , if it please you , you may intercept him .
But , good my lord , do it so cunningly 
That my discovery be not aimed at ;
For love of you , not hate unto my friend ,
Hath made me publisher of this pretence .

Upon mine honour , he shall never know 
That I had any light from thee of this .

Adieu , my lord : Sir Valentine is coming .

Sir Valentine , whither away so fast ?

Please it your Grace , there is a messenger 
That stays to bear my letters to my friends ,
And I am going to deliver them .

Be they of much import ?

The tenour of them doth but signify 
My health and happy being at your court .

Nay then , no matter : stay with me awhile ;
I am to break with thee of some affairs 
That touch me near , wherein thou must be secret .
'Tis not unknown to thee that I have sought 
To match my friend Sir Thurio to my daughter .

I know it well , my lord ; and sure , the match 
Were rich and honourable ; besides , the gentleman 
Is full of virtue , bounty , worth , and qualities 
Beseeming such a wife as your fair daughter .
Cannot your Grace win her to fancy him ?

No , trust me : she is peevish , sullen , froward ,
Proud , disobedient , stubborn , lacking duty ;
Neither regarding that she is my child ,
Nor fearing me as if I were her father :
And , may I say to thee this pride of hers ,
Upon advice , hath drawn my love from her ;
And , where I thought the remnant of mine age 
Should have been cherish'd by her child-like duty ,
I now am full resolv'd to take a wife 
And turn her out to who will take her in :
Then let her beauty be her wedding-dower ;
For me and my possessions she esteems not .

What would your Grace have me to do in this ?

There is a lady of Verona here ,
Whom I affect ; but she is nice and coy 
And nought esteems my aged eloquence :
Now therefore , would I have thee to my tutor ,
For long agone I have forgot to court ;
Besides , the fashion of the time is chang'd ,
How and which way I may bestow myself 
To be regarded in her sun-bright eye .

Win her with gifts , if she respect not words :
Dumb jewels often in their silent kind 
More than quick words do move a woman's mind .

But she did scorn a present that I sent her .

A woman sometime scorns what best contents her .
Send her another ; never give her o'er ,
For scorn at first makes after-love the more .
If she do frown , 'tis not in hate of you ,
But rather to beget more love in you ;
If she do chide , 'tis not to have you gone ;
For why the fools are mad if left alone .
Take no repulse , whatever she doth say ;
For , 'get you gone ,' she doth not mean , 'away !' 
Flatter and praise , commend , extol their graces ;
Though ne'er so black , say they have angels' faces .
That man that hath a tongue , I say , is no man ,
If with his tongue he cannot win a woman .

But she I mean is promis'd by her friends 
Unto a youthful gentleman of worth ,
And kept severely from resort of men ,
That no man hath access by day to her .

Why then , I would resort to her by night .

Ay , but the doors be lock'd and keys kept safe ,
That no man hath recourse to her by night .

What lets but one may enter at her window ?

Her chamber is aloft , far from the ground ,
And built so shelving that one cannot climb it 
Without apparent hazard of his life .

Why then , a ladder quaintly made of cords ,
To cast up , with a pair of anchoring hooks ,
Would serve to scale another Hero's tower ,
So bold Leander would adventure it .

Now , as thou art a gentleman of blood ,
Advise me where I may have such a ladder .

When would you use it ? pray , sir , tell me that .

This very night ; for Love is like a child ,
That longs for every thing that he can come by .

By seven o'clock I'll get you such a ladder .

But hark thee ; I will go to her alone :
How shall I best convey the ladder thither ?

It will be light , my lord , that you may bear it 
Under a cloak that is of any length .

A cloak as long as thine will serve the turn ?

Ay , my good lord .

Then let me see thy cloak :
I'll get me one of such another length .

Why , any cloak will serve the turn , my lord .

How shall I fashion me to wear a cloak ?
I pray thee , let me feel thy cloak upon me .

What letter is this same ? What's here ?To Silvia !
And here an engine fit for my proceeding !
I'll be so bold to break the seal for once .

My thoughts do harbour with my Silvia nightly ;
And slaves they are to me that send them flying 
O ! could their master come and go as lightly ,
Himself would lodge where senseless they are lying !
My herald thoughts in thy pure bosom rest them ;
While I , their king , that thither them importune ,
Do curse the grace that with such grace hath bless'd them ,
Because myself do want my servants' fortune :
I curse myself , for they are sent by me ,
That they should harbour where their lord would be .

What's here ?

Silvia , this night I will enfranchise thee 

'Tis so ; and here's the ladder for the purpose .
Why , Phaethon ,for thou art Merops' son ,
Wilt thou aspire to guide the heavenly car 
And with thy daring folly burn the world ?
Wilt thou reach stars , because they shine on thee ?
Go , basc intruder ! overweening slave !
Bestow thy fawning smiles on equal mates ,
And think my patience , more than thy desert ,
Is privilege for thy departure hence .
Thank me for this more than for all the favours 
Which all too much I have bestow'd on thee .
But if thou linger in my territories 
Longer than swiftest expedition 
Will give thee time to leave our royal court ,
By heaven ! my wrath shall far exceed the love 
I ever borc my daughter or thyself .
Be gone ! I will not hear thy vain excuse ;
But , as thou lov'st thy life , make speed from hence .


And why not death rather than living torment ?
To die is to be banish'd from myself ;
And Silvia is myself : banish'd from her 
Is self from self ,a deadly banishment !
What light is light , if Silvia be not seen ?
What joy is joy , if Silvia be not by ?
Unless it be to think that she is by 
And feed upon the shadow of perfection .
Except I be by Silvia in the night ,
There is no music in the nightingale ;
Unless I look on Silvia in the day ,
There is no day for me to look upon .
She is my essence ; and I leave to be ,
If I be not by her fair influence 
Foster'd , illumin'd , cherish'd , kept alive .
I fly not death , to fly his deadly doom :
Tarry I here , I but attend on death ;
But , fly I hence , I fly away from life .


Run , boy ; run , run , and seek him out .

Soho ! soho !

What seest thou ?

Him we go to find : there's not a hair on's head but 'tis a Valentine .

Valentine ?

No .

Who then ? his spirit ?

Neither .

What then ?

Nothing .

Can nothing speak ? Master , shall I strike ?

Who would'st thou strike ?

Nothing .

Villain , forbear .

Why , sir , I'll strike nothing : I pray you ,

Sirrah , I say , forbear .Friend Valentine , a word .

My ears are stopp'd and cannot hear good news ,
So much of bad already hath possess'd them .

Then in dumb silence will I bury mine ,
For they are harsh , untuneable and bad .

Is Silvia dead ?

No , Valentine .

No Valentine , indeed , for sacred Silvia !
Hath she forsworn me ?

No , Valentine .

No Valentine , if Silvia have forsworn me !
What is your news ?

Sir , there is a proclamation that you are vanished .

That thou art banished , O , that's the news ,
From hence , from Silvia , and from me thy friend .

O , I have fed upon this woe already ,
And now excess of it will make me surfeit .
Doth Silvia know that I am banished ?

Ay , ay ; and she hath offer'd to the doom 
Which , unrevers'd , stands in effectual force 
A sea of melting pearl , which some call tears :
Those at her father's churlish feet she tender'd ;
With them , upon her knees , her humble self ;
Wringing her hands , whose whiteness so became them 
As if but now they waxed pale for woe :
But neither bended knees , pure hands held up ,
Sad sighs , deep groans , nor silver-shedding tears ,
Could penetrate her uncompassionate sire ;
But Valentine , if he be ta'en , must die .
Besides , her intercession chaf'd him so ,
When she for thy repeal was suppliant ,
That to close prison he commanded her ,
With many bitter threats of biding there .

No more ; unless the next word that thou speak'st 
Have some malignant power upon my life :
If so , I pray thee , breathe it in mine ear ,
As ending anthem of my endless dolour .

Cease to lament for that thou canst not help ,
And study help for that which thou lament'st .
Time is the nurse and breeder of all good .
Here if thou stay , thou canst not see thy love ;
Besides , thy staying will abridge thy life .
Hope is a lover's staff ; walk hence with that 
And manage it against despairing thoughts .
Thy letters may be here , though thou art hence ;
Which , being writ to me , shall be deliver'd 
Even in the milk-white bosom of thy love .
The time now serves not to expostulate :
Come , I'll convey thee through the city-gate ,
And , ere I part with thee , confer at large 
Of all that may concern thy love-affairs .
As thou lov'st Silvia , though not for thyself ,
Regard thy danger , and along with me !

I pray thee , Launce , and if thou seest my boy ,
Bid him make haste and meet me at the North-gate .

Go , sirrah , find him out . Come , Valentine .

O my dear Silvia ! hapless Valentine !


I am but a fool , look you ; and yet I have the wit to think my master is a kind of a knave : but that's all one , if he be but one knave . He lives not now that knows me to be in love : yet I am in love ; but a team of horse shall not pluck that from me , nor who 'tis I love ; and yet 'tis a woman ; but what woman , I will not tell myself ; and yet 'tis a milkmaid ; yet 'tis not a maid , for she hath had gossips ; yet 'tis a maid , for she is her master's maid , and serves for wages . She hath more qualities than a water-spaniel ,which is much in a bare Christian .

Here is the catelog of her condition . Imprimis , She can fetch and carry . Why , a horse can do no more : nay , a horse cannot fetch , but only carry ; therefore , is she better than a jade . Item , She can milk ; look you , a sweet virtue in a maid with clean hands .


How now , Signior Launce ! what news with your mastership ?

With my master's ship ? why , it is at sea .

Well , your old vice still ; mistake the word . What news , then , in your paper ?

The blackest news that ever thou heardest .

Why , man , how black ?

Why , as black as ink .

Let me read them .

Fie on thee , jolthead ! thou canst not read .

Thou liest ; I can .

I will try thee . Tell me this : who begot thee ?

Marry , the son of my grandfather .

O , illiterate loiterer ! it was the son of thy grandmother . This proves that thou canst not read .

Come , fool , come : try me in thy paper .

There ; and Saint Nicholas be thy speed !

Imprimis , She can milk .

Ay , that she can .

Item , She brews good ale .

And thereof comes the proverb , 'Blessing of your heart , you brew good ale .' 

Item , She can sew .

That's as much as to say , Can she so ?

Item , She can knit .

What need a man care for a stock with a wench , when she can knit him a stock ?

Item , She can wash and scour .

A special virtue ; for then she need not be washed and scoured .

Item , She can spin .

Then may I set the world on wheels , when she can spin for her living .

Item , She hath many nameless virtues .

That's as much as to say , bastard virtues ; that , indeed , know not their fathers , and therefore have no names .

Here follow her vices .

Close at the heels of her virtues .

Item , She is not to be kissed fasting , in respect of her breath .

Well , that fault may be mended with a breakfast . Read on .

Item , She hath a sweet mouth .

That makes amends for her sour breath .

Item , She doth talk in her sleep .

It's no matter for that , so she sleep not in her talk .

Item , She is slow in words .

O villain , that set this down among her vices ! To be slow in words is a woman's only virtue : I pray thee , out with't , and place it for her chief virtue .

Item , She is proud .

Out with that too : it was Eve's legacy , and cannot be ta'en from her .

Item , She hath no teeth .

I care not for that neither , because I love crusts .

Item , She is curst .

Well ; the best is , she hath no teeth to bite .

Item , She will often praise her liquor .

If her liquor be good , she shall : if she will not , I will ; for good things should be praised .

Item , She is too liberal .

Of her tongue she cannot , for that's writ down she is slow of : of her purse she shall not , for that I'll keep shut : now , of another thing she may , and that cannot I help . Well , proceed .

Item , She hath more hair than wit , and more faults than hairs , and more wealth than faults .

Stop there ; I'll have her : she was mine , and not mine , twice or thrice in that last article . Rehearse that once more .

Item , She hath more hair than wit .

More hair than wit it may be ; I'll prove it : the cover of the salt hides the salt , and therefore it is more than the salt ; the hair , that covers the wit is more than the wit , for the greater hides the less . What's next ?

And more faults than hairs .

That's monstrous ! O , that that were out !

And more wealth than faults .

Why , that word makes the faults gracious . Well , I'll have her ; and if it be a match , as nothing is impossible ,

What then ?

Why , then will I tell thee ,that thy master stays for thee at the North-gate .

For me ?

For thee ! ay ; who art thou ? he hath stayed for a better man than thee .

And must I go to him ?

Thou must run to him , for thou hast stayed so long that going will scarce serve the turn .

Why didst not tell me sooner ? pox of your love-letters !


Now will he be swing'd for reading my letter . An unmannerly slave , that will thrust himself into secrets . I'll after , to rejoice in the boy's correction .


Sir Thurio , fear not but that she will love you ,
Now Valentine is banish'd from her sight .

Since his exile she hath despis'd me most ,
Forsworn my company and rail'd at me ,
That I am desperate of obtaining her .

This weak impress of love is as a figure 
Trenched in ice , which with an hour's heat 
Dissolves to water and doth lose his form .
A little time will melt her frozen thoughts ,
And worthless Valentine shall be forgot .


How now , Sir Proteus ! Is your countryman 

According to our proclamation gone ?

Gone , my good lord .

My daughter takes his going grievously .

A little time , my lord , will kill that grief .

So I believe ; but Thurio thinks not so .
Proteus , the good conceit I hold of thee ,
For thou hast shown some sign of good desert ,
Makes me the better to confer with thee .

Longer than I prove loyal to your Grace 
Let me not live to look upon your Grace .

Thou know'st how willingly I would effect 
The match between Sir Thurio and my daughter .

I do , my lord .

And also , I think , thou art not ignorant 
How she opposes her against my will .

She did , my lord , when Valentine was here .

Ay , and perversely she persevers so .
What might we do to make the girl forget 
The love of Valentine , and love Sir Thurio ?

The best way is to slander Valentine 
With falsehood , cowardice , and poor descent ,
Three things that women highly hold in hate .

Ay , but she'll think that it is spoke in hate .

Ay , if his enemy deliver it :
Therefore it must with circumstance be spoken 
By one whom she esteemeth as his friend .

Then you must undertake to slander him .

And that , my lord , I shall be loath to do :
'Tis an ill office for a gentleman ,
Especially against his very friend .

Where your good word cannot advantage him ,
Your slander never can endamage him :
Therefore the office is indifferent ,
Being entreated to it by your friend .

You have prevail'd , my lord . If I can do it ,
By aught that I can speak in his dispraise ,
She shall not long continue love to him .
But say this weed her love from Valentine ,
It follows not that she will love Sir Thurio .

Therefore , as you unwind her love from him ,
Lest it should ravel and be good to none ,
You must provide to bottom it on me ;
Which must be done by praising me as much 
As you in worth dispraise Sir Valentine .

And , Proteus , we dare trust you in this kind ,
Because we know , on Valentine's report ,
You are already Love's firm votary 
And cannot soon revolt and change your mind .
Upon this warrant shall you have access 
Where you with Silvia may confer at large ;
For she is lumpish , heavy , melancholy ,
And , for your friend's sake , will be glad of you ;
Where you may temper her , by your persuasion 
To hate young Valentine and love my friend .

As much as I can do I will effect .
But you , Sir Thurio , are not sharp enough ;
You must lay lime to tangle her desires 
By wailful sonnets , whose composed rimes 
Should be full-fraught with serviceable vows .

Ay ,
Much is the force of heaven-bred poesy .

Say that upon the altar of her beauty 
You sacrifice your tears , your sighs , your heart .
Write till your ink be dry , and with your tears 
Moist it again , and frame some feeling line 
That may discover such integrity :
For Orpheus' lute was strung with poets' sinews ,
Whose golden touch could soften steel and stones ,
Make tigers tame and huge leviathans 
Forsake unsounded deeps to dance on sands .
After your dire-lamenting elegies ,
Visit by night your lady's chamber-window 
With some sweet consort : to their instruments 
Tune a deploring dump ; the night's dead silence 
Will well become such sweet-complaining grievance .
This , or else nothing , will inherit her .

This discipline shows thou hast been in love .

And thy advice this night I'll put in practice .
Therefore , sweet Proteus , my direction-giver ,
Let us into the city presently 
To sort some gentlemen well skill'd in music .
I have a sonnet that will serve the turn 
To give the onset to thy good advice .

About it , gentlemen !

We'll wait upon your grace till aftersupper ,
And afterward determine our proceedings .

Even now about it ! I will pardon you .

Fellows , stand fast ; I see a passenger .

If there be ten , shrink not , but down with 'em .


Stand , sir , and throw us that you have about ye ;
If not , we'll make you sit and rifle you .

Sir , we are undone : these are the villains 
That all the travellers do fear so much .

My friends ,

That's not so , sir ; we are your enemies .

Peace ! we'll hear him .

Ay , by my beard , will we , for he is a proper man .

Then know , that I have little wealth to lose .
A man I am cross'd with adversity :
My riches are these poor habiliments ,
Of which if you should here disfurnish me ,
You take the sum and substance that I have .

Whither travel you ?

To Verona .

Whence came you ?

From Milan .

Have you long sojourn'd there ?

Some sixteen months ; and longer might have stay'd 
If crooked fortune had not thwarted me .

What ! were you banish'd thence ?

I was .

For what offence ?

For that which now torments me to rehearse .
I kill'd a man , whose death I much repent ;
But yet I slew him manfully , in fight ,
Without false vantage or base treachery .

Why , ne'er repent it , if it were done so .
But were you banish'd for so small a fault ?

I was , and held me glad of such a doom .

Have you the tongues ?

My youthful travel therein made me happy ,
Or else I often had been miserable .

By the bare scalp of Robin Hood's fat friar ,
This fellow were a king for our wild faction !

We'll have him : Sirs , a word .

Master , be one of them ;
It is an honourable kind of thievery .

Peace , villain !

Tell us this : have you anything to take to ?

Nothing , but my fortune .

Know then , that some of us are gentlemen ,
Such as the fury of ungovern'd youth 
Thrust from the company of awful men :
Myself was from Verona banished 
For practising to steal away a lady ,
An heir , and near allied unto the duke .

And I from Mantua , for a gentleman ,
Who , in my mood , I stabb'd unto the heart .

And I for such like petty crimes as these .
But to the purpose ; for we cite our faults ,
That they may hold excus'd our lawless lives ;
And , partly , seeing you are beautified 
With goodly shape , and by your own report 
A linguist , and a man of such perfection 
As we do in our quality much want 

Indeed , because you are a banish'd man ,
Therefore , above the rest , we parley to you .
Are you content to be our general ?
To make a virtue of necessity 
And live , as we do , in this wilderness ?

What say'st thou ? wilt thou be of our consort ?
Say 'ay ,' and be the captain of us all :
We'll do thee homage and be rul'd by thee ,
Love thee as our commander and our king .

But if thou scorn our courtesy , thou diest .

Thou shalt not live to brag what we have offer'd .

I take your offer and will live with you ,
Provided that you do no outrages 
On silly women , or poor passengers .

No ; we detest such vile , base practices .
Come , go with us ; we'll bring thee to our crews ,
And show thee all the treasure we have got ,
Which , with ourselves , all rest at thy dispose .


Already have I been false to Valentine ,
And now I must be as unjust to Thurio .
Under the colour of commending him ,
I have access my own love to prefer :
But Silvia is too fair , too true , too holy ,
To be corrupted with my worthless gifts .
When I protest true loyalty to her ,
She twits me with my falsehood to my friend ;
When to her beauty I commend my vows ,
She bids me think how I have been forsworn 
In breaking faith with Julia whom I lov'd :
And notwithstanding all her sudden quips ,
The least whereof would quell a lover's hope ,
Yet , spaniel-like , the more she spurns my love ,
The more it grows , and fawneth on her still .
But here comes Thurio : now must we to her window ,
And give some evening music to her ear .


How now , Sir Proteus ! are you crept before us ?

Ay , gentle Thurio ; for you know that love 
Will creep in service where it cannot go .

Ay ; but I hope , sir , that you love not here .

Sir , but I do ; or else I would be hence .

Who ? Silvia ?

Ay , Silvia , for your sake .

I thank you for your own . Now , gentlemen ,
Let's tune , and to it lustily a while .


Now , my young guest , methinks you're allycholly : I pray you , why is it ?

Marry , mine host , because I cannot be merry .

Come , we'll have you merry . I'll bring you where you shall hear music and see the gentleman that you asked for .

But shall I hear him speak ?

Ay , that you shall .

That will be music .


Hark ! hark !

Is he among these ?

Ay ; but peace ! let's hear 'em .


Who is Silvia ? what is she ?
That all our swains commend her ?
Holy , fair , and wise is she ;
The heaven such grace did lend her ,
That she might admired be .
Is she kind as she is fair ?
For beauty lives with kindness :
Love doth to her eyes repair ,
To help him of his blindness ;
And , being help'd , inhabits there .
Then to Silvia let us sing ,
That Silvia is excelling ;
She excels each mortal thing 
Upon the dull earth dwelling ;
To her let us garlands bring .

How now ! are you sadder than you were before ? How do you , man ? the music likes you not .

You mistake ; the musician likes me not .

Why , my pretty youth ?

He plays false , father .

How ? out of tune on the strings ?

Not so ; but yet so false that he grieves my very heart-strings .

You have a quick ear .

Ay ; I would I were deaf ; it makes me have a slow heart .

I perceive you delight not in music .

Not a whit ,when it jars so .

Hark ! what fine change is in the music !

Ay , that change is the spite .

You would have them always play but one thing ?

I would always have one play but one thing .
But , host , doth this Sir Proteus that we talk on 
Often resort unto this gentlewoman ?

I will tell you what Launce , his man , told me : he lov'd her out of all nick .

Where is Launce ?

Gone to seek his dog ; which , to-morrow , by his master's command , he must carry for a present to his lady .

Peace ! stand aside : the company parts .

Sir Thurio , fear not you : I will so plead 
That you shall say my cunning drift excels .

Where meet we ?

At Saint Gregory's well .

Farewell .

Madam , good even to your ladyship .

I thank you for your music , gentlemen .
Who is that that spake ?

One , lady , if you knew his pure heart's truth ,
You would quickly learn to know him by his voice .

Sir Proteus , as I take it .

Sir Proteus , gentle lady , and your servant .

What is your will ?

That I may compass yours .

You have your wish ; my will is even this :
That presently you hie you home to bed .
Thou subtle , perjur'd , false , disloyal man !
Think'st thou I am so shallow , so conceitless ,
To be seduced by thy flattery ,
That hast deceiv'd so many with thy vows ?
Return , return , and make thy love amends .
For me , by this pale queen of night I swear ,
I am so far from granting thy request 
That I despise thee for thy wrongful suit ,
And by and by intend to chide myself 
Even for this time I spend in talking to thee .

I grant , sweet love , that I did love a lady ;
But she is dead .

'Tware false , if I should speak it ;
For I am sure she is not buried .

Say that she be ; yet Valentine thy friend 
Survives ; to whom , thyself art witness 
I am betroth'd : and art thou not asham'd 
To wrong him with thy importunacy ?

I likewise hear that Valentine is dead .

And so suppose am I ; for in his grave , Assure thyself my love is buried .

Sweet lady , let me rake it from the earth .

Go to thy lady's grave and call hers thence ;
Or , at the least , in hers sepulchre thine .

He heard not that .

Madam , if your heart be so obdurate ,
Vouchsafe me yet your picture for my love ,
The picture that is hanging in your chamber :
To that I'll speak , to that I'll sigh and weep ;
For since the substance of your perfect self 
Is else devoted , I am but a shadow ,
And to your shadow will I make true love .

If 'twere a substance , you would , sure , deceive it ,
And make it but a shadow , as I am .

I am very loath to be your idol , sir ;
But , since your falsehood shall become you well 
To worship shadows and adore false shapes ,
Send to me in the morning and I'll send it .
And so , good rest .

As wretches have o'er night 
That wait for execution in the morn .


Host , will you go ?

By my halidom , I was fast asleep .

Pray you , where lies Sir Proteus ?

Marry , at my house . Trust me , I think 'tis almost day .

Not so ; but it hath been the longest night 
That e'er I watch'd and the most heaviest .


This is the hour that Madam Silvia 
Entreated me to call , and know her mind :
There's some great matter she'd employ me in .
Madam , Madam !


Who calls ?

Your servant , and your friend ;
One that attends your ladyship's command .

Sir Eglamour , a thousand times good morrow .

As many , worthy lady , to yourself .
According to your ladyship's impose ,
I am thus early come to know what service 
It is your pleasure to command me in .

O Eglamour , thou art a gentleman 
Think not I flatter , for I swear I do not 
Valiant , wise , remorseful , well-accomplish'd .
Thou art not ignorant what dear good will 
I bear unto the banish'd Valentine ,
Nor how my father would enforce me marry 
Vain Thurio , whom my very soul abhors .
Thyself hast lov'd ; and I have heard thee say 
No grief did ever come so near thy heart 
As when thy lady and thy true love died ,
Upon whose grave thou vow'dst pure chastity .
Sir Eglamour , I would to Valentine ,
To Mantua , where , I hear he makes abode ;
And , for the ways are dangerous to pass ,
I do desire thy worthy company ,
Upon whose faith and honour I repose .
Urge not my father's anger , Eglamour ,
But think upon my grief , a lady's grief ,
And on the justice of my flying hence ,
To keep me from a most unholy match ,
Which heaven and fortune still rewards with plagues .
I do desire thee , even from a heart 
As full of sorrows as the sea of sands ,
To bear me company and go with me :
If not , to hide what I have said to thee ,
That I may venture to depart alone .

Madam , I pity much your grievances ;
Which since I know they virtuously are plac'd ,
I give consent to go along with you ,
Recking as little what betideth me 
As much I wish all good befortune you .
When will you go ?

This evening coming .

Where shall I meet you ?

At Friar Patrick's cell ,
Where I intend holy confession .

I will not fail your ladyship .
Good morrow , gentle lady .

Good morrow , kind Sir Eglamour .


When a man's servant shall play the cur with him , look you , it goes hard ; one that I brought up of a puppy ; one that I saved from drowning , when three or four of his blind brothers and sisters went to it . I have taught him , even as one would say precisely , 'Thus would I teach a dog .' I was sent to deliver him as a present to Mistress Silvia from my master , and I came no sooner into the dining-chamber but he steps me to her trencher and steals her capon's leg . O ! 'tis a foul thing when a cur cannot keep himself in all companies . I would have , as one should say , one that takes upon him to be a dog indeed , to be , as it were , a dog at all things . If I had not had more wit than he , to take a fault upon me that he did , I think verily he had been hanged for't : sure as I live , he had suffered for't : you shall judge . He thrusts me himself into the company of three or four gentleman-like dogs under the duke's table : he had not been there bless the mark a pissing-while , but all the chamber smelt him . 'Out with the dog !' says one ; 'What cur is that ?' says another ; 'Whip him out ,' says the third ; 'Hang him up ,' says the duke . I , having been acquainted with the smell before , knew it was Crab , and goes me to the fellow that whips the dogs : 'Friend ,' quoth I , 'you mean to whip the dog ?' 'Ay , marry , do I ,' quoth he . 'You do him the more wrong ,' quoth I ; ''twas I did the thing you wot of .' He makes me no more ado , but whips me out of the chamber . How many masters would do this for his servant ? Nay , I'll be sworn , I have sat in the stocks for puddings he hath stolen , otherwise he had been executed ; I have stood on the pillory for geese he hath killed , otherwise he had suffered for't ; thou thinkest not of this now . Nay , I remember the trick you served me when I took my leave of Madam Silvia : did not I bid thee still mark me and do as I do ? When didst thou see me heave up my leg and make water against a gentlewoman's farthingale ? Didst thou ever see me do such a trick ?


Sebastian is thy name ? I like thee well 
And will employ thee in some service presently .

In what you please : I will do what I can .

I hope thou wilt .

How now , you whoreson peasant !
Where have you been these two days loitering ?

Marry , sir , I carried Mistress Silvia the dog you bade me .

And what says she to my little jewel ?

Marry , she says , your dog was a cur , and tells you , currish thanks is good enough for such a present .

But she received my dog ?

No , indeed , did she not : here have I brought him back again .

What ! didst thou offer her this from me ?

Ay , sir : the other squirrel was stolen from me by the hangman boys in the marketplace ; and then I offered her mine own , who is a dog as big as ten of yours , and therefore the gift the greater .

Go , get thee hence , and find my dog again ,
Or ne'er return again into my sight .
Away , I say ! Stay'st thou to vex me here ?
A slave that still an end turns me to shame .

Sebastian , I have entertained thee 
Partly , that I have need of such a youth ,
That can with some discretion do my business ,
For't is no trusting to yond foolish lout ;
But chiefly for thy face and thy behaviour ,
Which , if my augury deceive me not ,
Witness good bringing up , fortune , and truth :
Therefore , know thou , for this I entertain thee .
Go presently , and take this ring with thee .
Deliver it to Madam Silvia :
She lov'd me well deliver'd it to me .

It seems , you lov'd not her , to leave her token .
She's dead , belike ?

Not so : I think , she lives .

Alas !

Why dost thou cry 'alas ?' 

I cannot choose 
But pity her .

Wherefore should'st thou pity her ?

Because methinks that she lov'd you as well 
As you do love your lady Silvia .
She dreams on him that has forgot her love ;
You dote on her , that cares not for your love .
'Tis pity , love should be so contrary ;
And thinking on it makes me cry , 'alas !' 

Well , well , give her that ring and therewithal 
This letter : that's her chamber . Tell my lady 
I claim the promise for her heavenly picture .
Your message done , hie home unto my chamber ,
Where thou shalt find me sad and solitary .


How many women would do such a message ?
Alas , poor Proteus ! thou hast entertain'd 
A fox to be the shepherd of thy lambs .
Alas , poor fool ! why do I pity him 
That with his very heart despiseth me ?
Because he loves her , he despiseth me ;
Because I love him , I must pity him .
This ring I gave him when he parted from me ,
To bind him to remember my good will ;
And now am I unhappy messenger 
To plead for that which I would not obtain ,
To carry that which I would have refus'd ,
To praise his faith which I would have disprais'd .
I am my master's true-confirmed love ,
But cannot be true servant to my master ,
Unless I prove false traitor to myself .
Yet will I woo for him ; but yet so coldly 
As heaven it knows , I would not have him speed .


Gentlewoman , good day ! I pray you , be my mean 

To bring me where to speak with Madam Silvia .

What would you with her , if that I be she ?

If you be she , I do entreat your patience To hear me speak the message I am sent on .

From whom ?

From my master , Sir Proteus , madam .

O ! he sends you for a picture ?

Ay , madam .

Ursula , bring my picture there .

Go , give your master this : tell him from me ,
One Julia , that his changing thoughts forget ,
Would better fit his chamber than this shadow .

Madam , please you peruse this letter .
Pardon me , madam , I have unadvis'd 
Deliver'd you a paper that I should not :
This is the letter to your ladyship .

I pray thee , let me look on that again .

It may not be : good madam , pardon me .

There , hold .
I will not look upon your master's lines :
I know , they are stuff'd with protestations 
And full of new-found oaths , which he will break 
As easily as I do tear his paper .

Madam , he sends your ladyship this ring .

The more shame for him that he sends it me ;
For , I have heard him say a thousand times ,
His Julia gave it him at his departure .
Though his false finger have profan'd the ring ,
Mine shall not do his Julia so much wrong .

She thanks you .

What say'st thou ?

I thank you , madam , that you tender her .
Poor gentlewoman ! my master wrongs her much .

Dost thou know her ?

Almost as well as I do know myself :
To think upon her woes , I do protest 
That I have wept a hundred several times .

Belike , she thinks , that Proteus hath forsook her .

I think she doth , and that's her cause of sorrow .

Is she not passing fair ?

She hath been fairer , madam , than she is .
When she did think my master lov'd her well ,
She , in my judgment , was as fair as you ;
But since she did neglect her looking-glass 
And threw her sun-expelling mask away ,
The air hath starv'd the roses in her cheeks 
And pinch'd the lily-tincture of her face ,
That now she is become as black as I .

How tall was she ?

About my stature ; for , at Pentecost ,
When all our pageants of delight were play'd ,
Our youth got me to play the woman's part ,
And I was trimm'd in Madam Julia's gown ,
Which served me as fit , by all men's judgments ,
As if the garment had been made for me :
Therefore I know she is about my height .
And at that time I made her weep agood ;
For I did play a lamentable part .
Madam , 'twas Ariadne passioning 
For Theseus' perjury and unjust flight ;
Which I so lively acted with my tears 
That my poor mistress , moved therewithal ,
Wept bitterly , and would I might be dead 
If I in thought felt not her very sorrow !

She is beholding to thee , gentle youth .
Alas , poor lady , desolate and left !
I weep myself to think upon thy words .
Here , youth , there is my purse : I give thee this 
For thy sweet mistress' sake , because thou lov'st her .
Farewell .

And she shall thank you for't , if e'er you know her .

A virtuous gentlewoman , mild and beautiful .
I hope my master's suit will be but cold ,
Since she respects my mistress' love so much .
Alas , how love can trifle with itself !
Here is her picture : let me see ; I think ,
If I had such a tire , this face of mine 
Were full as lovely as is this of hers ;
And yet the painter flatter'd her a little ,
Unless I flatter with myself too much .
Her hair is auburn , mine is perfect yellow :
If that be all the difference in his love 
I'll get me such a colour'd periwig .
Her eyes are grey as glass , and so are mine :
Ay , but her forehead's low , and mine's as high .
What should it be that he respects in her 
But I can make respective in myself ,
If this fond Love were not a blinded god ?
Come , shadow , come , and take this shadow up ,
For 'tis thy rival . O thou senseless form !
Thou shalt be worshipp'd , kiss'd , lov'd , and ador'd ,
And , were there sense in his idolatry ,
My substance should be statue in thy stead .
I'll use thee kindly for thy mistress' sake ,
That us'd me so ; or else , by Jove I vow ,
I should have scratch'd out your unseeing eyes ,
To make my master out of love with thee .

The sun begins to gild the western sky ,
And now it is about the very hour 
That Silvia at Friar Patrick's cell should meet me .
She will not fail ; for lovers break not hours ,
Unless it be to come before their time ,
So much they spur their expedition .
See , where she comes .

Lady , a happy evening !

Amen , amen ! go on , good Eglamour ,
Out at the postern by the abbey-wall .
I fear I am attended by some spies .

Fear not : the forest is not three leagues off ;
If we recover that , we're sure enough .


Sir Proteus , what says Silvia to my suit ?

O , sir , I find her milder than she was ;
And yet she takes exceptions at your person .

What ! that my leg is too long ?

No , that it is too little .

I'll wear a boot to make it somewhat rounder .

But love will not be spurr'd to what it loathes .

What says she to my face ?

She says it is a fair one .

Nay then , the wanton lies ; my face is black .

But pearls are fair , and the old saying is ,
'Black men are pearls in beauteous ladies' eyes .' 

'Tis true , such pearls as put out ladies' eyes ;
For I had rather wink than look on them .

How likes she my discourse ?

Ill , when you talk of war .

But well , when I discourse of love and peace ?

But better , indeed , when you hold your peace .

What says she to my valour ?

O , sir , she makes no doubt of that .

She needs not , when she knows it cowardice .

What says she to my birth ?

That you are well deriv'd .

True ; from a gentleman to a fool .

Considers she my possessions ?

O , ay ; and pities them .

Wherefore ?

That such an ass should owe them .

That they are out by lease .

Here comes the duke .


How now , Sir Proteus ! how now , Thurio !
Which of you saw Sir Eglamour of late ?

Not I .

Nor I .

Saw you my daughter ?

Neither .

Why then ,
She's fled unto that peasant Valentine ,
And Eglamour is in her company .
'Tis true ; for Friar Laurence met them both ,
As he in penance wander'd through the forest ;
Him he knew well , and guess'd that it was she ,
But , being mask'd , he was not sure of it ;
Besides , she did intend confession 
At Patrick's cell this even , and there she was not .
These likelihoods confirm her flight from hence .
Therefore , I pray you , stand not to discourse ,
But mount you presently and meet with me 
Upon the rising of the mountain-foot ,
That leads towards Mantua , whither they are fled .
Dispatch , sweet gentlemen , and follow me .


Why , this it is to be a peevish girl ,
That flies her fortune when it follows her .
I'll after , more to be reveng'd on Eglamour 
Than for the love of reckless Silvia .


And I will follow , more for Silvia's love 
Than hate of Eglamour that goes with her .


And I will follow , more to cross that love 
Than hate for Silvia that is gone for love .


Come , come ,
Be patient ; we must bring you to our captain .

A thousand more mischances than this one 
Have learn'd me how to brook this patiently .

Come , bring her away .

Where is the gentleman that was with her ?

Being nimble-footed , he hath outrun us ;
But Moyses and Valerius follow him .
Go thou with her to the west end of the wood ;
There is our captain . We'll follow him that's fled :
The thicket is beset ; he cannot 'scape .


Come , I must bring you to our captain's cave .
Fear not ; he bears an honourable mind ,
And will not use a woman lawlessly .

O Valentine ! this I endure for thee .


How use doth breed a habit in a man !
This shadowy desart , unfrequented woods ,
I better brook than flourishing peopled towns .
Here can I sit alone , unseen of any ,
And to the nightingale's complaining notes 
Tune my distresses and record my woes .
O thou that dost inhabit in my breast ,
Leave not the mansion so long tenantless ,
Lest , growing ruinous , the building fall 
And leave no memory of what it was !
Repair me with thy presence , Silvia !
Thou gentle nymph , cherish thy forlorn swain !

What halloing and what stir is this to-day ?
These are my mates , that make their wills their law ,
Have some unhappy passenger in chase .
They love me well ; yet I have much to do 
To keep them from uncivil outrages .
Withdraw thee , Valentine : who's this comes here ?

Madam , this service I have done for you 
Though you respect not aught your servant doth 
To hazard life and rescue you from him 
That would have forc'd your honour and your love .
Vouchsafe me , for my meed , but one fair look ;
A smaller boon than this I cannot beg ,
And less than this , I am sure , you cannot give .

How like a dream is this I see and hear !
Love , lend me patience to forbear awhile .

O , miserable , unhappy that I am !

Unhappy were you , madam , ere I came ;
But by my coming I have made you happy .

By thy approach thou mak'st me most unhappy .

And me , when he approacheth to your presence .

Had I been seized by a hungry lion ,
I would have been a breakfast to the beast ,
Rather than have false Proteus rescue me .
O ! heaven be judge how I love Valentine ,
Whose life's as tender to me as my soul ,
And full as much for more there cannot be 
I do detest false perjur'd Proteus .
Therefore be gone , solicit me no more .

What dangerous action , stood it next to death ,
Would I not undergo for one calm look !
O , 'tis the curse in love , and still approv'd ,
When women cannot love where they're belov'd !

When Proteus cannot love where he's belov'd .
Read over Julia's heart , thy first best love ,
For whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith 
Into a thousand oaths ; and all those oaths 
Descended into perjury to love me .
Thou hast no faith left now , unless thou'dst two ,
And that's far worse than none : better have none 
Than plural faith which is too much by one .
Thou counterfeit to thy true friend !

In love 
Who respects friend ?

All men but Proteus .

Nay , if the gentle spirit of moving words 
Can no way change you to a milder form ,
I'll woo you like a soldier , at arms' end ,
And love you 'gainst the nature of love ,force ye .

O heaven !

I'll force thee yield to my desire .

Ruffian , let go that rude uncivil touch ;
Thou friend of an ill fashion !

Valentine !

Thou common friend , that's without faith or love 
For such is a friend now treach'rous man !
Thou hast beguil'd my hopes : naught but mine eye 
Could have persuaded me . Now I dare not say 
I have one friend alive : thou wouldst disprove me .
Who should be trusted now , when one's right hand 
Is perjur'd to the bosom ? Proteus ,
I am sorry I must never trust thee more ,
But count the world a stranger for thy sake .
The private wound is deep'st . O time most curst !
'Mongst all foes that a friend should be the worst !

My shame and guilt confound me .
Forgive me , Valentine . If hearty sorrow 
Be a sufficient ransom for offence ,
I tender't here : I do as truly suffer 
As e'er I did commit .

Then , I am paid ;
And once again I do receive thee honest .
Who by repentance is not satisfied 
Is nor of heaven , nor earth ; for these are pleas'd .
By penitence the Eternal's wrath's appeas'd :
And , that my love may appear plain and free ,
All that was mine in Silvia I give thee .

O me unhappy !


Look to the boy .

Why , boy ! why , wag ! how now ! what's the matter ?
Look up ; speak .

O good sir , my master charg'd me 
To deliver a ring to Madam Silvia ,
Which out of my neglect was never done .

Where is that ring , boy ?

Here 'tis this is it .


How ! let me see .
Why this is the ring I gave to Julia .

O , cry you mercy , sir ; I have mistook :
This is the ring you sent to Silvia .


But how cam'st thou by this ring ?
At my depart I gave this unto Julia .

And Julia herself did give it me ;
And Julia herself hath brought it hither .

How ! Julia !

Behold her that gave aim to all thy oaths ,
And entertain'd them deeply in her heart :
How oft hast thou with perjury cleft the root !
O Proteus ! let this habit make thee blush .
Be thou asham'd that I have took upon me 
Such an immodest raiment ; if shame live 
In a disguise of love .
It is the lesser blot , modesty finds ,
Women to change their shapes than men their minds .

Than men their minds ! 'tis true . O heaven ! were man 
But constant , he were perfect : that one error 
Fills him with faults ; makes him run through all the sins :
Inconstancy falls off ere it begins .
What is in Silvia's face , but I may spy 
More fresh in Julia's with a constant eye ?

Come , come , a hand from either .
Let me be blest to make this happy close :
'Twere pity two such friends should be long foes .

Bear witness , heaven , I have my wish , for ever .

And I mine .


A prize ! a prize ! a prize !

Forbear , forbear , I say ; it is my lord the duke .
Your Grace is welcome to a man disgrac'd ,
Banished Valentine .

Sir Valentine !

Yonder is Silvia ; and Silvia's mine .

Thurio , give back , or else embrace thy death ;
Come not within the measure of my wrath ;
Do not name Silvia thine ; if once again ,
Verona shall not hold thee . Here she stands ;
Take but possession of her with a touch ;
I dare thee but to breathe upon my love .

Sir Valentine , I care not for her , I .
I hold him but a fool that will endanger 
His body for a girl that loves him not :
I claim her not , and therefore she is thine .

The more degenerate and base art thou ,
To make such means for her as thou hast done ,
And leave her on such slight conditions .
Now , by the honour of my ancestry ,
I do applaud thy spirit , Valentine ,
And think thee worthy of an empress' love .
Know then , I here forget all former griefs ,
Cancel all grudge , repeal thee home again ,
Plead a new state in thy unrivall'd merit ,
To which I thus subscribe : Sir Valentine ,
Thou art a gentleman and well deriv'd ;
Take thou thy Silvia , for thou hast deserv'd her .

I thank your Grace ; the gift hath made me happy .
I now beseech you , for your daughter's sake ,
To grant one boon that I shall ask of you .

I grant it , for thine own , whate'er it be .

These banish'd men , that I have kept withal 
Are men endu'd with worthy qualities :
Forgive them what they have committed here ,
And let them be recall'd from their exile .
They are reformed , civil , full of good ,
And fit for great employment , worthy lord .

Thou hast prevail'd ; I pardon them , and thee :
Dispose of them as thou know'st their deserts .
Come , let us go : we will include all jars 
With triumphs , mirth , and rare solemnity .

And as we walk along , I dare be bold 
With our discourse to make your Grace to smile .
What think you of this page , my lord ?

I think the boy hath grace in him : he blushes .

I warrant you , my lord , more grace than boy .

What mean you by that saying ?

Please you , I'll tell you as we pass along ,
That you will wonder what hath fortuned .
Come , Proteus ; 'tis your penance , but to hear 
The story of your loves discovered :
That done , our day of marriage shall be yours ;
One feast , one house , one mutual happiness .

THE WINTERS TALE

If you shall chance , Camillo , to visit Bohemia , on the like occasion whereon my services are now on foot , you shall see , as I have said , great difference betwixt our Bohemia and your Sicilia .

I think , this coming summer , the King of Sicilia means to pay Bohemia the visitation which he justly owes him .

Wherein our entertainment shall shame us we will be justified in our loves : for , indeed ,

Beseech you ,

Verily , I speak it in the freedom of my knowledge : we cannot with such magnificence in so rare I know not what to say . We will give you sleepy drinks , that your senses , unintelligent of our insufficience , may , though they cannot praise us , as little accuse us .

You pay a great deal too dear for what's given freely .

Believe me , I speak as my understanding instructs me , and as mine honesty puts it to utterance .

Sicilia cannot show himself over-kind to Bohemia . They were trained together in their childhoods ; and there rooted betwixt them then such an affection which cannot choose but branch now . Since their more mature dignities and royal necessities made separation of their society , their encounters , though not personal , have been royally attorneyed with interchange of gifts , letters , loving embassies ; that they have seemed to be together , though absent , shook hands , as over a vast , and embraced , as it were , from the ends of opposed winds . The heavens continue their loves !

I think there is not in the world either malice or matter to alter it . You have an unspeakable comfort of your young Prince Mamilhus : it is a gentleman of the greatest promise that ever came into my note .

I very well agree with you in the hopes of him . It is a gallant child ; one that indeed physics the subject , makes old hearts fresh ; they that went on crutches ere he was born desire yet their life to see him a man .

Would they else be content to die ?

Yes ; if there were no other excuse why they should desire to live .

If the king had no son , they would desire to live on crutches till he had one .


Nine changes of the watery star have been 
The shepherd's note since we have left our throne 
Without a burden : time as long again 
Would be fill'd up , my brother , with our thanks ;
And yet we should for perpetuity 
Go hence in debt : and therefore , like a cipher ,
Yet standing in rich place , I multiply 
With one 'We thank you' many thousands moe 
That go before it .

Stay your thanks awhile ,
And pay them when you part .

Sir , that's to-morrow .
I am question'd by my fears , of what may chance 
Or breed upon our absence ; that may blow 
No sneaping winds at home , to make us say ,
'This is put forth too truly !' Besides , I have stay'd 
To tire your royalty .

We are tougher , brother ,
Than you can put us to't .

No longer stay .

One seven-night longer .

Very sooth , to-morrow .

We'll part the time between's then ; and in that 
I'll no gainsaying .

Press me not , beseech you , so .
There is no tongue that moves , none , none i' the world ,
So soon as yours could win me : so it should now ,
Were there necessity in your request , although 
'Twere needful I denied it . My affairs 
Do even drag me homeward ; which to hinder 
Were in your love a whip to me ; my stay 
To you a charge and trouble : to save both ,
Farewell , our brother .

Tongue-tied , our queen ? speak you .

I had thought , sir , to have held my peace until 
You had drawn oaths from him not to stay .
You , sir ,
Charge him too coldly : tell him , you are sure 
All in Bohemia's well : this satisfaction 
The by-gone day proclaim'd : say this to him ,
He's beat from his best ward .

Well said , Hermione .

To tell he longs to see his son were strong :
But let him say so then , and let him go ;
But let him swear so , and he shall not stay ,
We'll thwack him hence with distaffs .


Yet of your royal presence I'll adventure 
The borrow of a week . When at Bohemia 
You take my lord , I'll give him my commission 
To let him there a month behind the gest 
Prefix'd for's parting : yet , good deed , Leontes ,
I love thee not a jar o' the clock behind 
What lady she her lord . You'll stay ?

No , madam .

Nay , but you will ?

I may not , verily .

Verily !
You put me off with limber vows ; but I ,
Though you would seek to unsphere the stars with oaths ,
Should yet say , 'Sir , no going .' Verily ,
You shall not go : a lady's 'verily' 's 
As potent as a lord's . Will you go yet ?
Force me to keep you as a prisoner ,
Not like a guest ; so you shall pay your fees 
When you depart , and save your thanks . How say you ?
My prisoner , or my guest ? by your dread 'verily ,' 
One of them you shall be .

Your guest , then , madam :
To be your prisoner should import offending ;
Which is for me less easy to commit 
Than you to punish .

Not your gaoler then ,
But your kind hostess . Come , I'll question you 
Of my lord's tricks and yours when you were boys :
You were pretty lordings then .

We were , fair queen ,
Two lads that thought there was no more behind 
But such a day to-morrow as to-day ,
And to be boy eternal .

Was not my lord the verier wag o' the two ?

We were as twinn'd lambs that did frisk i' the sun ,
And bleat the one at the other : what we chang'd 
Was innocence for innocence ; we knew not 
The doctrine of ill-doing , no nor dream'd 
That any did . Had we pursu'd that life ,
And our weak spirits ne'er been higher rear'd 
With stronger blood , we should have answer'd heaven 
Boldly , 'not guilty ;' the imposition clear'd 
Hereditary ours .

By this we gather 
You have tripp'd since .

O ! my most sacred lady ,
Temptations have since then been born to's ; for 
In those unfledg'd days was my wife a girl ;
Your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes 
Of my young playfellow .

Grace to boot !
Of this make no conclusion , lest you say 
Your queen and I are devils ; yet , go on :
The offences we have made you do we'll answer ;
If you first sinn'd with us , and that with us 
You did continue fault , and that you slipp'd not 
With any but with us .

Is he won yet ?

He'll stay , my lord .

At my request he would not .
Hermione , my dearest , thou never spok'st 
To better purpose .

Never ?

Never , but once .

What ! have I twice said well ? when was't before ?
I prithee tell me ; cram's with praise , and make's 
As fat as tame things : one good deed , dying tongueless ,
Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that .
Our praises are our wages : you may ride's 
With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere 
With spur we heat an acre . But to the goal :
My last good deed was to entreat his stay :
What was my first ? it has an elder sister ,
Or I mistake you : O ! would her name were Grace .
But once before I spoke to the purpose : when ?
Nay , let me have't ; I long .

Why , that was when 
Three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death ,
Ere I could make thee open thy white hand 
And clap thyself my love : then didst thou utter ,
'I am yours for ever .' 

'Tis grace indeed .
Why , lo you now , I have spoke to the purpose twice :
The one for ever earn'd a royal husband ,
The other for some while a friend .


Too hot , too hot !
To mingle friendship far is mingling bloods .
I have tremor cordis on me : my heart dances ;
But not for joy ; not joy . This entertainment 
May a free face put on , derive a liberty 
From heartiness , from bounty , fertile bosom ,
And well become the agent :'t may I grant :
But to be paddling palms and pinching fingers ,
As now they are , and making practis'd smiles ,
As in a looking-glass ; and then to sigh , as 'twere 
The mort o' the deer ; O ! that is entertainment 
My bosom likes not , nor my brows . Mamillius ,
Art thou my boy ?

Ay , my good lord .

I' fecks ?
Why , that's my bawcock . What ! hast smutch'd thy nose ?
They say it is a copy out of mine . Come , captain ,
We must be neat ; not neat , but cleanly , captain :
And yet the steer , the heifer , and the calf ,
Are all call'd neat . Still virginalling 
Upon his palm ! How now , you wanton calf !
Art thou my calf ?

Yes , if you will , my lord .

Thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots that I have ,
To be full like me : yet they say we are 
Almost as like as eggs ; women say so ,
That will say anything : but were they false 
As o'er-dy'd blacks , as wind , as waters , false 
As dice are to be wish'd by one that fixes 
No bourn 'twixt his and mine , yet were it true 
To say this boy were like me . Come , sir page ,
Look on me with your wolkin eye : sweet villain !
Most dear'st ! my collop ! Can thy dam ?may't be ?
Affection ! thy intention stabs the centre :
Thou dost make possible things not so held ,
Communicat'st with dreams ;how can this be ?
With what's unreal thou co-active art ,
And fellow'st nothing : then , 'tis very credent 
Thou mayst co-join with something ; and thou dost ,
And that beyond commission , and I find it ,
And that to the infection of my brains 
And hardening of my brows .

What means Sicilia ?

He something seems unsettled .

How , my lord !
What cheer ? how is't with you , best brother ?

You look 
As if you held a brow of much distraction :
Are you mov'd , my lord ?

No , in good earnest .
How sometimes nature will betray its folly ,
Its tenderness , and make itself a pastime 
To harder bosoms ! Looking on the lines 
Of my boy's face , methoughts I did recoil 
Twenty-three years , and saw myself unbreech'd ,
In my green velvet coat , my dagger muzzled ,
Lest it should bite its master , and so prove ,
As ornaments oft do , too dangerous :
How like , methought , I then was to this kernel ,
This squash , this gentleman . Mine honest friend ,
Will you take eggs for money ?

No , my lord , I'll fight .

You will ? why , happy man be his dole ! My brother ,
Are you so fond of your young prince as we 
Do seem to be of ours ?

If at home , sir ,
He's all my exercise , my mirth , my matter ,
Now my sworn friend and then mine enemy ;
My parasite , my soldier , statesman , all :
He makes a July's day short as December ,
And with his varying childness cures in me 
Thoughts that would thick my blood .

So stands this squire 
Offic'd with me . We two will walk , my lord ,
And leave you to your graver steps . Hermione ,
How thou lov'st us , show in our brother's welcome :
Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap :
Next to thyself and my young rover , he's 
Apparent to my heart .

If you would seek us ,
We are yours i' the garden : shall's attend you there ?

To your own bents dispose you : you'll be found ,
Be you beneath the sky .

I am angling now ,
Though you perceive me not how I give line .
Go to , go to !
How she holds up the neb , the bill to him !
And arms her with the boldness of a wife 
To her allowing husband !

Gone already !
Inch-thick , knee-deep , o'er head and ears a fork'd one !
Go play , boy , play ; thy mother plays , and I 
Play too , but so disgrac'd a part , whose issue 
Will hiss me to my grave : contempt and clamour 
Will be my knell . Go play , boy , play . There have been ,
Or I am much deceiv'd , cuckolds ere now ;
And many a man there is even at this present ,
Now , while I speak this , holds his wife by the arm ,
That little thinks she has been sluic'd in's absence ,
And his pond fish'd by his next neighbour , by 
Sir Smile , his neighbour : nay , there's comfort in't ,
Whiles other men have gates , and those gates open'd ,
As mine , against their will . Should all despair 
That have revolted wives the tenth of mankind 
Would hang themselves . Physic for't there is none ;
It is a bawdy planet , that will strike 
Where 'tis predominant ; and 'tis powerful , think it ,
From east , west , north , and south : be it concluded ,
No barricado for a belly : know't ;
It will let in and out the enemy 
With bag and baggage . Many a thousand on's 
Have the disease , and feel't not . How now , boy !

I am like you , they say .

Why , that's some comfort .
What ! Camillo there ?

Ay , my good lord .

Go play , Mamillius ; thou'rt an honest man .

Camillo , this great sir will yet stay longer .

You had much ado to make his anchor hold :
When you cast out , it still came home .

Didst note it ?

He would not stay at your petitions ; made 
His business more material .

Didst perceive it ?


They're here with me already , whispering , rounding 
'Sicilia is a so-forth .' 'Tis far gone ,
When I shall gust it last . How came't , Camillo ,
That he did stay ?

At the good queen's entreaty .

At the queen's , be't : 'good' should be pertinent ;
But so it is , it is not . Was this taken 
By any understanding pate but thine ?
For thy conceit is soaking ; will draw in 
More than the common blocks : not noted , is't ,
But of the finer natures ? by some severals 
Of head-piece extraordinary ? lower messes 
Perchance are to this business purblind ? say .

Business , my lord ! I think most understand 
Bohemia stays here longer .

Ha !

Stays here longer .

Ay , but why ?

To satisfy your highness and the entreaties 
Of our most gracious mistress .

Satisfy !
The entreaties of your mistress ! satisfy !
Let that suffice . I have trusted thee , Camillo ,
With all the nearest things to my heart , as well 
My chamber-councils , wherein , priest-like , thou 
Hast cleans'd my bosom : I from thee departed 
Thy penitent reform'd ; but we have been 
Deceiv'd in thy integrity , deceiv'd 
In that which seems so .

Be it forbid , my lord !

To bide upon 't , thou art not honest ; or ,
If thou inclin'st that way , thou art a coward ,
Which hoxes honesty behind , restraining 
From course requir'd ; or else thou must be counted 
A servant grafted in my serious trust ,
And therein negligent ; or else a fool 
That seest a game play'd home , the rich stake drawn ,
And tak'st it all for jest .

My gracious lord ,
I may be negligent , foolish , and fearful ;
In every one of these no man is free ,
But that his negligence , his folly , fear ,
Among the infinite doings of the world ,
Sometime puts forth . In your affairs , my lord ,
If ever I were wilful-negligent ,
It was my folly ; if industriously 
I play'd the fool , it was my negligence ,
Not weighing well the end ; if ever fearful 
To do a thing , where I the issue doubted ,
Whereof the execution did cry out 
Against the non-performance , 'twas a fear 
Which oft infects the wisest : these , my lord ,
Are such allow'd infirmities that honesty 
Is never free of : but , beseech your Grace ,
Be plainer with me ; let me know my trespass 
By its own visage ; if I then deny it ,
'Tis none of mine .

Ha' not you seen , Camillo ,
But that's past doubt ; you have , or your eyeglass 
Is thicker than a cuckold's horn ,or heard ,
For to a vision so apparent rumour 
Cannot be mute ,or thought ,for cogitation 
Resides not in that man that does not think ,
My wife is slippery ? If thou wilt confess ,
Or else be impudently negative ,
To have nor eyes , nor ears , nor thought ,then say 
My wife's a hobby-horse ; deserves a name 
As rank as any flax-wench that puts to 
Before her troth-plight : say't and justify't .

I would not be a stander-by , to hear 
My sovereign mistress clouded so , without 
My present vengeance taken : 'shrew my heart ,
You never spoke what did become you less 
Than this ; which to reiterate were sin 
As deep as that , though true .

Is whispering nothing ?
Is leaning cheek to cheek ? is meeting noses ?
Kissing with inside lip ? stopping the career 
Of laughter with a sigh ?a note infallible 
Of breaking honesty ,horsing foot on foot ?
Skulking in corners ? wishing clocks more swift ?
Hours , minutes ? noon , midnight ? and all eyes 
Blind with the pin and web but theirs , theirs only ,
That would unseen be wicked ? is this nothing ?
Why , then the world and all that's in't is nothing ;
The covering sky is nothing ; Bohemia nothing ;
My wife is nothing ; nor nothing have these nothings ,
If this be nothing .

Good my lord , be cur'd 
Of this diseas'd opinion , and betimes ;
For 'tis most dangerous .

Say it be , 'tis true .

No , no , my lord .

It is ; you lie , you lie :
I say thou liest , Camillo , and I hate thee ;
Pronounce thee a gross lout , a mindless slave ,
Or else a hovering temporizer , that 
Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil ,
Inclining to them both : were my wife's liver 
Infected as her life , she would not live 
The running of one glass .

Who does infect her ?

Why , he that wears her like her medal , hanging 
About his neck , Bohemia : who , if I 
Had servants true about me , that bare eyes 
To see alike mine honour as their profits ,
Their own particular thrifts , they would do that 
Which should undo more doing : ay , and thou ,
His cup-bearer ,whom I from meaner form 
Have bench'd and rear'd to worship , who mayst see 
Plainly , as heaven sees earth , and earth sees heaven ,
How I am galled ,mightst bespice a cup ,
To give mine enemy a lasting wink ;
Which draught to me were cordial .

Sir , my lord ,
I could do this , and that with no rash potion ,
But with a lingering dram that should not work 
Maliciously like poison : but I cannot 
Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress ,
So sovereingly being honourable :
I have lov'd thee ,

Make that thy question , and go rot !
Dost think I am so muddy , so unsettled ,
To appoint myself in this vexation ; sully 
The purity and whiteness of my sheets ,
Which to preserve is sleep ; which being spotted 
Is goads , thorns , nettles , tails of wasps ?
Give scandal to the blood o' the prince my son ,
Who I do think is mine , and love as mine ,
Without ripe moving to't ? Would I do this ?
Could man so blench ?

I must believe you , sir :
I do ; and will fetch off Bohemia for't ;
Provided that when he's remov'd , your highness 
Will take again your queen as yours at first ,
Even for your son's sake ; and thereby for sealing 
The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms 
Known and allied to yours .

Thou dost advise me 
Even so as I mine own course have set down :
I'll give no blemish to her honour , none .

My lord ,
Go then ; and with a countenance as clear 
As friendship wears at feasts , keep with Bohemia ,
And with your queen . I am his cupbearer ;
If from me he have wholesome beverage ,
Account me not your servant .

This is all :
Do't , and thou hast the one half of my heart ;
Do't not , thou split'st thine own .

I'll do't , my lord .

I will seem friendly , as thou hast advis'd me .


O miserable lady ! But , for me ,
What case stand I in ? I must be the poisoner 
Of good Polixenes ; and my ground to do't 
Is the obedience to a master ; one 
Who , in rebellion with himself will have 
All that are his so too . To do this deed 
Promotion follows . If I could find example 
Of thousands that had struck anointed kings ,
And flourish'd after , I'd not do't ; but since 
Nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one ,
Let villany itself forswear't . I must 
Forsake the court : to do't , or no , is certain 
To me a break-neck . Happy star reign now !
Here comes Bohemia .


This is strange : methinks 
My favour here begins to warp . Not speak ?
Good day , Camillo .

Hail , most royal sir !

What is the news i' the court ?

None rare , my lord .

The king hath on him such a countenance 
As he had lost some province and a region 
Lov'd as he loves himself : even now I met him 
With customary compliment , when he ,
Wafting his eyes , to the contrary , and falling 
A lip of much contempt , speeds from me and 
So leaves me to consider what is breeding 
That changes thus his manners .

I dare not know , my lord .

How ! dare not ! do not ! Do you know , and dare not 
Be intelligent to me ? 'Tis thereabouts :
For , to yourself , what you do know , you must ,
And cannot say you dare not . Good Camillo ,
Your chang'd complexions are to me a mirror 
Which shows me mine chang'd too ; for I must be 
A party in this alteration , finding 
Myself thus alter'd with't .

There is a sickness 
Which puts some of us in distemper ; but 
I cannot name the disease , and it is caught 
Of you that yet are well .

How ! caught of me ?
Make me not sighted like the basilisk :
I have look'd on thousands , who have sped the better 
By my regard , but kill'd none so . Camillo ,
As you are certainly a gentleman , thereto 
Clerk-like experienc'd , which no less adorns 
Our gentry than our parents' noble names ,
In whose success we are gentle ,I beseech you ,
If you know aught which does behove my knowledge 
Thereof to be inform'd , imprison it not 
In ignorant concealment .

I may not answer .

A sickness caught of me , and yet I well !
I must be answer'd . Dost thou hear , Camillo ;
I conjure thee , by all the parts of man 
Which honour does acknowledge ,whereof the least 
Is not this suit of mine ,that thou declare 
What incidency thou dost guess of harm 
Is creeping toward me ; how far off , how near ;
Which way to be prevented if to be ;
If not , how best to bear it .

Sir , I will tell you ;
Since I am charg'd in honour and by him 
That I think honourable . Therefore mark my counsel ,
Which must be even as swiftly follow'd as 
I mean to utter it , or both yourself and me 
Cry 'lost ,' and so good night !

On , good Camillo .

I am appointed him to murder you .

By whom , Camillo ?

By the king .

For what ?

He thinks , nay , with all confidence he swears ,
As he had seen't or been an instrument 
To vice you to't , that you have touch'd his queen 
Forbiddenly .

O , then my best blood turn 
To an infected jelly , and my name 
Be yok'd with his that did betray the Best !
Turn then my freshest reputation to 
A savour , that may strike the dullest nostril 
Where I arrive ; and my approach be shunn'd ,
Nay , hated too , worse than the great'st infection 
That e'er was heard or read !

Swear his thought over 
By each particular star in heaven and 
By all their influences , you may as well 
Forbid the sea for to obey the moon 
As or by oath remove or counsel shake 
The fabric of his folly , whose foundation 
Is pil'd upon his faith , and will continue 
The standing of his body .

How should this grow ?

I know not : but I am sure 'tis safer to 
Avoid what's grown than question how 'tis born .
If therefore you dare trust my honesty ,
That lies enclosed in this trunk , which you 
Shall bear along impawn'd , away to-night !
Your followers I will whisper to the business ,
And will by twos and threes at several posterns 
Clear them o'the city . For myself , I'll put 
My fortunes to your service , which are here 
By this discovery lost . Be not uncertain ;
For , by the honour of my parents , I 
Have utter'd truth , which , if you seek to prove ,
I dare not stand by ; nor shall you be safer 
Than one condemn'd by the king's own mouth , thereon 
His execution sworn .

I do believe thee :
I saw his heart in's face . Give me thy hand :
Be pilot to me and thy places shall 
Still neighbour mine . My ships are ready and 
My people did expect my hence departure 
Two days ago . This jealousy 
Is for a precious creature : as she's rare 
Must it be great , and , as his person's mighty 
Must it be violent , and , as he does conceive 
He is dishonour'd by a man which ever 
Profess'd to him , why , his revenges must 
In that be made more bitter . Fear o'ershades me :
Good expedition be my friend , and comfort 
The gracious queen , part of his theme , but nothing 
Of his ill-ta'en suspicion ! Come . Camillo ;
I will respect thee as a father if 
Thou bear'st my life off hence : let us avoid .

It is in mine authority to command 
The keys of all the posterns : please your highness 
To take the urgent hour . Come , sir , away !

Take the boy to you : he so troubles me , 'Tis past enduring .

Come , my gracious lord , Shall I be your playfellow ?

No , I'll none of you .

Why , my sweet lord ?

You'll kiss me hard and speak to me as if 
I were a baby still . I love you better .

And why so , my lord ?

Not for because 
Your brows are blacker ; yet black brows , they say ,
Become some women best , so that there be not 
Too much hair there , but in a semicircle ,
Or a half-moon made with a pen .

Who taught you this ?

I learn'd it out of women's faces . Pray now ,
What colour are your eyebrows ?

Blue , my lord .

Nay , that's a mock : I have seen a lady's nose 
That has been blue , but not her eyebrows .

Hark ye ;
The queen your mother rounds apace : we shall 
Present our services to a fine new prince 
One of these days ; and then you'd wanton with us ,
If we would have you .

She is spread of late 
Into a goodly bulk : good time encounter her !

What wisdom stirs amongst you ? Come sir , now 
I am for you again : pray you , sit by us ,
And tell's a tale .

Merry or sad shall't be ?

As merry as you will .

A sad tale's best for winter .
I have one of sprites and goblins .

Let's have that , good sir .
Come on , sit down : come on , and do your best 
To fright me with your sprites ; you're powerful at it .

There was a man ,

Nay , come , sit down ; then on .

Dwelt by a churchyard . I will tell it softly ;
Yond crickets shall not hear it .

Come on then ,
And give't me in mine ear .


Was he met there ? his train ? Camillo with him ?

Behind the tuft of pines I met them : never 
Saw I men scour so on their way : I ey'd them 
Even to their ships 

How blest am I 
In my just censure , in my true opinion !
Alack , for lesser knowledge ! How accurs'd 
In being so blest ! There may be in the cup 
A spider steep'd , and one may drink , depart ,
And yet partake no venom , for his knowledge 
Is not infected ; but if one present 
The abhorr'd ingredient to his eye , make known 
How he hath drunk , he cracks his gorge , his sides ,
With violent hefts . I have drunk , and seen the spider .
Camillo was his help in this , his pandar :
There is a plot against my life , my crown ;
All's true that is mistrusted : that false villain 
Whom I employ'd was pre-employ'd by him :
He has discover'd my design , and I 
Remain a pinch'd thing ; yea , a very trick 
For them to play at will . How came the posterns 
So easily open ?

By his great authority ;
Which often hath no less prevail'd than so 
On your command .

I know't too well .


Give me the boy : I am glad you did not nurse him :
Though he does bear some signs of me , yet you 
Have too much blood in him .

What is this ? sport ?

Bear the boy hence ; he shall not come about her ;
Away with him !

and let her sport herself 
With that she's big with ; for 'tis Polixenes 
Has made thee swell thus .

But I'd say he had not ,
And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying ,
Howe'er you lean to the nayward .

You , my lords ,
Look on her , mark her well ; be but about 
To say , 'she is a goodly lady ,' and 
The justice of your hearts will thereto add 
''Tis pity she's not honest , honourable :' 
Praise her but for this her without-door form ,
Which , on my faith deserves high speech ,and straight 
The shrug , the hum or ha , these petty brands 
That calumny doth use ,O , I am out !
That mercy does , for calumny will sear 
Virtue itself : these shrugs , these hums and ha's ,
When you have said 'she's goodly ,' come between ,
Ere you can say 'she's honest .' But be't known ,
From him that has most cause to grieve it should be ,
She's an adulteress .

Should a villain say so ,
The most replenish'd villain in the world ,
He were as much more villain : you , my lord ,
Do but mistake .

You have mistook , my lady ,
Polixenes for Leontes . O thou thing !
Which I'll not call a creature of thy place ,
Lest barbarism , making me the precedent ,
Should a like language use to all degrees ,
And mannerly distinguishment leave out 
Betwixt the prince and beggar : I have said 
She's an adulteress ; I have said with whom :
More , she's a traitor , and Camillo is 
A federary with her , and one that knows 
What she should shame to know herself 
But with her most vile principal , that she's 
A bed-swerver , even as bad as those 
That vulgars give bold'st titles ; ay , and privy 
To this their late escape .

No , by my life ,
Privy to none of this . How will this grieve you 
When you shall come to clearer knowledge that 
You thus have publish'd me ! Gentle my lord ,
You scarce can right me throughly then to say 
You did mistake .

No ; if I mistake 
In those foundations which I build upon ,
The centre is not big enough to bear 
A schoolboy's top . Away with her to prison !
He who shall speak for her is afar off guilty 
But that he speaks .

There's some ill planet reigns :
I must be patient till the heavens look 
With an aspect more favourable . Good my lords ,
I am not prone to weeping , as our sex 
Commonly are ; the want of which vain dew 
Perchance shall dry your pities ; but I have 
That honourable grief lodg'd here which burns 
Worse than tears drown . Beseech you all , my lords ,
With thoughts so qualified as your charities 
Shall best instruct you , measure me ; and so 
The king's will be perform'd !

Shall I be heard ?

Who is't that goes with me ? Beseech your highness ,
My women may be with me ; for you see 
My plight requires it . Do not weep , good fools ;
There is no cause : when you shall know your mistress 
Has deserv'd prison , then abound in tears 
As I come out : this action I now go on 
Is for my better grace . Adieu , my lord :
I never wish'd to see you sorry ; now 
I trust I shall . My women , come ; you have leave .

Go , do our bidding : hence !


Beseech your highness call the queen again .

Be certain what you do , sir , lest your justice 
Prove violence : in the which three great ones suffer ,
Yourself , your queen , your son .

For her , my lord ,
I dare my life lay down , and will do't , sir ,
Please you to accept it ,that the queen is spotless 
I' the eyes of heaven and to you : I mean ,
In this which you accuse her .

If it prove 
She's otherwise , I'll keep my stables where 
I lodge my wife ; I'll go in couples with her ;
Than when I feel and see her no further trust her ;
For every inch of woman in the world ,
Ay , every dram of woman's flesh is false ,
If she be .

Hold your peaces !

Good my lord ,

It is for you we speak , not for ourselves .
You are abus'd , and by some putter-on 
That will be damn'd for't ; would I knew the villain ,
I would land-damn him . Be she honour-flaw'd ,
I have three daughters ; the eldest is eleven ,
The second and the third , nine and some five ;
If this prove true , they'll pay for't : by mine honour ,
I'll geld them all ; fourteen they shall not see ,
To bring false generations : they are co-heirs ;
And I had rather glib myself than they 
Should not produce fair issue .

Cease ! no more .
You smell this business with a sense as cold 
As is a dead man's nose ; but I do see't and feel't ,
As you feel doing thus , and see withal 
The instruments that feel .

If it be so ,
We need no grave to bury honesty :
There's not a grain of it the face to sweeten 
Of the whole dungy earth .

What ! lack I credit ?

I had rather you did lack than I , my lord ,
Upon this ground ; and more it would content me 
To have her honour true than your suspicion ,
Be blam'd for't how you might .

Why , what need we 
Commune with you of this , but rather follow 
Our forceful instigation ? Our prerogative 
Calls not your counsels , but our natural goodness 
Imparts this ; which if you ,or stupified 
Or seeming so in skill ,cannot or will not 
Relish a truth like us , inform yourselves 
We need no more of your advice : the matter ,
The loss , the gain , the ordering on't , is all 
Properly ours .

And I wish , my liege ,
You had only in your silent judgment tried it ,
Without more overture .

How could that be ?
Either thou art most ignorant by age ,
Or thou wert born a fool . Camillo's flight ,
Added to their familiarity ,
Which was as gross as ever touch'd conjecture ,
That lack'd sight only , nought for approbation 
But only seeing , all other circumstances 
Made up to the deed , doth push on this proceeding :
Yet , for a greater confirmation ,
For in an act of this importance 'twere 
Most piteous to be wild ,I have dispatch'd in post 
To sacred Delphos , to Apollo's temple ,
Cleomenes and Dion , whom you know 
Of stuff'd sufficiency . Now , from the oracle 
They will bring all ; whose spiritual counsel had ,
Shall stop or spur me . Have I done well ?

Well done , my lord .

Though I am satisfied and need no more 
Than what I know , yet shall the oracle 
Give rest to the minds of others , such as he 
Whose ignorant credulity will not 
Come up to the truth . So have we thought it good 
From our free person she should be confin'd ,
Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence 
Be left her to perform . Come , follow us :
We are to speak in public ; for this business 
Will raise us all .

To laughter , as I take it ,
If the good truth were known .


The keeper of the prison , call to him ;
Let him have knowledge who I am .

Good lady ,
No court in Europe is too good for thee ;
What dost thou then in prison ?


Now , good sir ,

You know me , do you not ?

For a worthy lady 
And one whom much I honour .

Pray you then ,
Conduct me to the queen .

I may not , madam : to the contrary 
I have express commandment .

Here's ado ,
To lock up honesty and honour from 
The access of gentle visitors ! Is't lawful , pray you ,
To see her women ? any of them ? Emilia ?

So please you , madam ,
To put apart these your attendants , I 
Shall bring Emilia forth .

I pray now , call her .
Withdraw yourselves .


And , madam ,
I must be present at your conference .

Well , be't so , prithee .

Here's such ado to make no stain a stain ,
As passes colouring .


Dear gentlewoman ,

How fares our gracious lady ?

As well as one so great and so forlorn 
May hold together . On her frights and griefs ,
Which never tender lady hath borne greater ,
She is something before her time deliver'd .

A boy ?

A daughter ; and a goodly babe ,
Lusty and like to live : the queen receives 
Much comfort in't ; says , 'My poor prisoner ,
I am innocent as you .' 

I dare be sworn :
These dangerous unsafe lunes i' the king , beshrew them !
He must be told on't , and he shall : the office 
Becomes a woman best ; I'll take't upon me .
If I prove honey-mouth'd , let my tongue blister ,
And never to my red-look'd anger be 
The trumpet any more . Pray you , Emilia ,
Commend my best obedience to the queen :
If she dares trust me with her little babe ,
I'll show it to the king and undertake to be 
Her advocate to the loud'st . We do not know 
How he may soften at the sight of the child :
The silence often of pure innocence 
Persuades when speaking fails .

Most worthy madam ,
Your honour and your goodness is so evident 
That your free undertaking cannot miss 
A thriving issue : there is no lady living 
So meet for this great errand . Please your ladyship 
To visit the next room , I'll presently 
Acquaint the queen of your most noble offer ,
Who but to-day hammer'd of this design ,
But durst not tempt a minister of honour ,
Lest she should be denied .

Tell her , Emilia ,
I'll use that tongue I have : if wit flow from't 
As boldness from my bosom , let it not be doubted 
I shall do good .

Now be you blest for it !
I'll to the queen . Please you , come something nearer .

Madam , if't please the queen to send the babe ,
I know not what I shall incur to pass it ,
Having no warrant .

You need not fear it , sir :
The child was prisoner to the womb , and is 
By law and process of great nature thence 
Freed and enfranchis'd ; not a party to 
The anger of the king , nor guilty of ,
If any be , the trespass of the queen .

I do believe it .

Do not you fear : upon mine honour , I 
Will stand betwixt you and danger .


Nor night , nor day , no rest ; it is but weakness 
To bear the matter thus ; mere weakness . If 
The cause were not in being ,part o' the cause ,
She the adultress ; for the harlot king 
Is quite beyond mine arm , out of the blank 
And level of my brain , plot-proof ; but she 
I can hook to me : say , that she were gone ,
Given to the fire , a moiety of my rest 
Might come to me again . Who's there ?

My lord ?

How does the boy ?

He took good rest to-night ;
'Tis hop'd his sickness is discharg'd .

To see his nobleness !
Conceiving the dishonour of his mother ,
He straight declin'd , droop'd , took it deeply ,
Fasten'd and fix'd the shame on't in himself ,
Threw off his spirit , his appetite , his sleep ,
And downright languish'd . Leave me solely : go ,
See how he fares .

Fie , fie ! no thought of him ;
The very thought of my revenges that way 
Recoil upon me : in himself too mighty ,
And in his parties , his alliance ; let him be 
Until a time may serve : for present vengeance ,
Take it on her . Camillo and Polixenes 
Laugh at me ; make their pastime at my sorrow :
They should not laugh , if I could reach them , nor 
Shall she within my power .


You must not enter .

Nay , rather , good my lords , be second to me :
Fear you his tyrannous passion more , alas ,
Than the queen's life ? a gracious innocent soul ,
More free than he is jealous .

That's enough .

Madam , he hath not slept to-night ; commanded 
None should come at him .

Not so hot , good sir ;
I come to bring him sleep . 'Tis such as you ,
That creep like shadows by him and do sigh 
At each his needless heavings , such as you 
Nourish the cause of his awaking : I 
Do come with words as med'cinal as true ,
Honest as either , to purge him of that humour 
That presses him from sleep .

What noise there , ho ?

No noise , my lord ; but needful conference 
About some gossips for your highness .

How !
Away with that audacious lady ! Antigonus ,
I charg'd thee that she should not come about me :
I knew she would .

I told her so , my lord ,
On your displeasure's peril , and on mine ,
She should not visit you .

What ! canst not rule her ?

From all dishonesty he can : in this ,
Unless he take the course that you have done ,
Commit me for committing honour , trust it ,
He shall not rule me .

La you now ! you hear ;
When she will take the rein I let her run ;
But she'll not stumble .

Good my liege , I come ,
And I beseech you , hear me , who professes 
Myself your loyal servant , your physician ,
Your most obedient counsellor , yet that dares 
Less appear so in comforting your evils 
Than such as most seem yours : I say , I come 
From your good queen .

Good queen !

Good queen , my lord , good queen ; I say , good queen ;
And would by combat make her good , so were I 
A man , the worst about you .

Force her hence .

Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes 
First hand me : on mine own accord I'll off ;
But first I'll do my errand . The good queen ,
For she is good , hath brought you forth a daughter :
Here 'tis ; commends it to your blessing .


Out !
A mankind witch ! Hence with her , out o' door :
A most intelligencing bawd !

Not so ;
I am as ignorant in that as you 
In so entitling me , and no less honest 
Than you are mad ; which is enough , I'll warrant ,
As this world goes , to pass for honest .

Traitors !
Will you not push her out ? Give her the bastard .


Thou dotard ! thou art woman-tir'd , unroosted 
By thy dame Partlet here . Take up the bastard ;
Take't up , I say ; give't to thy crone .

For ever 
Unvenerable be thy hands , if thou 
Tak'st up the princess by that forced baseness 
Which he has put upon't !

He dreads his wife .

So I would you did ; then , 'twere past all doubt ,
You'd call your children yours .

A nest of traitors !

I am none , by this good light .

Nor I ; nor any 
But one that's here , and that's himself ; for he 
The sacred honour of himself , his queen's ,
His hopeful son's , his babe's , betrays to slander ,
Whose sting is sharper than the sword's ; and will not ,
For , as the case now stands , it is a curse 
He cannot be compell'd to't ,once remove 
The root of his opinion , which is rotten 
As ever oak or stone was sound .

A callat 
Of boundless tongue , who late hath beat her husband 
And now baits me ! This brat is none of mine ;
It is the issue of Polixenes :
Hence with it ; and , together with the dam 
Commit them to the fire !

It is yours ;
And , might we lay the old proverb to your charge ,
'So like you , 'tis the worse .' Behold , my lords ,
Although the print be little , the whole matter 
And copy of the father ; eye , nose , lip ,
The trick of's frown , his forehead , nay , the valley ,
The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek , his smiles ,
The very mould and frame of hand , nail , finger :
And thou , good goddess Nature , which hast made it 
So like to him that got it , if thou hast 
The ordering of the mind too , 'mongst all colours 
No yellow in't ; lest she suspect , as he does ,
Her children not her husband's .

A gross hag !
And , lozel , thou art worthy to be hang'd ,
That wilt not stay her tongue .

Hang all the husbands 
That cannot do that feat , you'll leave yourself 
Hardly one subject .

Once more , take her hence .

A most unworthy and unnatural lord 
Can do no more .

I'll ha' thee burn'd .

I care not :
It is a heretic that makes the fire ,
Not she which burns in't . I'll not call you tyrant ;
But this most cruel usage of your queen ,
Not able to produce more accusation 
Than your own weak-hing'd fancy ,something savours 
Of tyranny , and will ignoble make you ,
Yea , scandalous to the world .

On your allegiance ,
Out of the chamber with her ! Were I a tyrant ,
Where were her life ? she durst not call me so 
If she did know me one . Away with her !

I pray you do not push me ; I'll be gone .
Look to your babe , my lord ; 'tis yours : Jove send her 
A better guiding spirit ! What need these hands ?
You , that are thus so tender o'er his follies ,
Will never do him good , not one of you .
So , so : farewell ; we are gone .


Thou , traitor , hast set on thy wife to this .
My child ! away with't !even thou , that hast 
A heart so tender o'er it , take it hence 
And see it instantly consum'd with fire :
Even thou and none but thou . Take it up straight :
Within this hour bring me word 'tis done ,
And by good testimony ,or I'll seize thy life ,
With what thou else call'st thine . If thou refuse 
And wilt encounter with my wrath , say so ;
The bastard brains with these my proper hands 
Shall I dash out . Go , take it to the fire ;
For thou sett'st on thy wife .

I did not , sir :
These lords , my noble fellows , if they please ,
Can clear me in't .

We can , my royal liege ,
He is not guilty of her coming hither .

You are liars all .

Beseech your highness , give us better credit :
We have always truly serv'd you , and beseech you 
So to esteem of us ; and on our knees we beg ,
As recompense of our dear services 
Past and to come , that you do change this purpose ,
Which being so horrible , so bloody , must 
Lead on to some foul issue . We all kneel .

I am a feather for each wind that blows .
Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel 
And call me father ? Better burn it now 
Than curse it then . But , be it ; let it live :
It shall not neither .

You , sir , come you hither ;
You that have been so tenderly officious 
With Lady Margery , your midwife there ,
To save this bastard's life ,for 'tis a bastard ,
So sure as thy beard's grey ,what will you adventure 
To save this brat's life ?

Any thing , my lord ,
That my ability may undergo ,
And nobleness impose : at least , thus much :
I'll pawn the little blood which I have left ,
To save the innocent : any thing possible .

It shall be possible . Swear by this sword 
Thou wilt perform my bidding .

I will , my lord .

Mark and perform it ,seest thou !for the fail 
Of any point in't shall not only be 
Death to thyself , but to thy lewd-tongu'd wife ,
Whom for this time we pardon . We enjoin thee ,
As thou art liegeman to us , that thou carry 
This female bastard hence ; and that thou bear it 
To some remote and desart place quite out 
Of our dominions ; and that there thou leave it ,
Without more mercy , to its own protection ,
And favour of the climate . As by strange fortune 
It came to us , I do in justice charge thee ,
On thy soul's peril and thy body's torture ,
That thou commend it strangely to some place ,
Where chance may nurse or end it . Take it up .

I swear to do this , though a present death 
Had been more merciful . Come on , poor babe :
Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens 
To be thy nurses ! Wolves and bears , they say ,
Casting their savageness aside have done 
Like offices of pity . Sir , be prosperous 
In more than this deed doth require ! And blessing 
Against this cruelty fight on thy side ,
Poor thing , condemn'd to loss !


No ; I'll not rear 
Another's issue .


Please your highness , posts 
From those you sent to the oracle are come 
An hour since : Cleomenes and Dion ,
Being well arriv'd from Delphos , are both landed ,
Hasting to the court .

So please you , sir , their speed 
Hath been beyond account .

Twenty-three days 
They have been absent : 'tis good speed ; foretells 
The great Apollo suddenly will have 
The truth of this appear . Prepare you , lords ;
Summon a session , that we may arraign 
Our most disloyal lady ; for , as she hath 
Been publicly accus'd , so shall she have 
A just and open trial . While she lives 
My heart will be a burden to me . Leave me ,
And think upon my bidding .

The climate's delicate , the air most sweet ,
Fertile the isle , the temple much surpassing 
The common praise it bears .

I shall report ,
For most it caught me , the celestial habits ,
Methinks I so should term them ,and the reverence 
Of the grave wearers . O , the sacrifice !
How ceremonious , solemn , and unearthly 
It was i' the offering !

But of all , the burst 
And the ear-deafening voice o' the oracle ,
Kin to Jove's thunder , so surpris'd my sense ,
That I was nothing .

If the event o' the journey 
Prove as successful to the queen ,O , be't so !  
As it hath been to us rare , pleasant , speedy ,
The time is worth the use on't .

Great Apollo 
Turn all to the best ! These proclamations ,
So forcing faults upon Hermione ,
I little like .

The violent carriage of it 
Will clear or end the business : when the oracle ,
Thus by Apollo's great divine seal'd up ,
Shall the contents discover , something rare 
Even then will rush to knowledge .Go :fresh horses !
And gracious be the issue !


This sessions , to our great grief we pronounce ,
Even pushes 'gainst our heart : the party tried 
The daughter of a king , our wife , and one 
Of us too much belov'd . Let us be clear'd 
Of being tyrannous , since we so openly 
Proceed in justice , which shall have due course ,
Even to the guilt or the purgation .
Produce the prisoner .

It is his highness' pleasure that the queen 
Appear in person here in court . Silence !


Read the indictment .

Hermione , queen to the worthy Leontes , King of Sicilia , thou art here accused and arraigned of high treason , in committing adultery with Polixenes , King of Bohemia , and conspiring with Camillo to take away the life of our sovereign lord the king , thy royal husband : the pretence whereof being by circumstances partly laid open , thou , Hermione , contrary to the faith and allegiance of a true subject , didst counsel and aid them , for their better safety , to fly away by night .

Since what I am to say must be but that 
Which contradicts my accusation , and 
The testimony on my part no other 
But what comes from myself , it shall scarce boot me 
To say 'Not guilty :' mine integrity 
Being counted falsehood , shall , as I express it ,
Be so receiv'd . But thus : if powers divine 
Behold our human actions , as they do ,
I doubt not then but innocence shall make 
False accusation blush , and tyranny 
Tremble at patience . You , my lord , best know ,
Who least will seem to do so ,my past life 
Hath been as continent , as chaste , as true ,
As I am now unhappy ; which is more 
Than history can pattern , though devis'd 
And play'd to take spectators . For behold me ,
A fellow of the royal bed , which owe 
A moiety of the throne , a great king's daughter ,
The mother to a hopeful prince , here standing 
To prate and talk for life and honour 'fore 
Who please to come and hear . For life , I prize it .
As I weigh grief , which I would spare : for honour ,
'Tis a derivative from me to mine ,
And only that I stand for . I appeal 
To your own conscience , sir , before Polixenes 
Came to your court , how I was in your grace ,
How merited to be so ; since he came ,
With what encounter so uncurrent I 
Have strain'd , to appear thus : if one jot beyond 
The bound of honour , or in act or will 
That way inclining , harden'd be the hearts 
Of all that hear me , and my near'st of kin 
Cry fie upon my grave !

I ne'er heard yet 
That any of these bolder vices wanted 
Less impudence to gainsay what they did 
Than to perform it first .

That's true enough ;
Though 'tis a saying , sir , not due to me .

You will not own it .

More than mistress of 
Which comes to me in name of fault , I must not 
At all acknowledge . For Polixenes ,
With whom I am accus'd ,I do confess 
I lov'd him as in honour he requir'd ,
With such a kind of love as might become 
A lady like me ; with a love even such ,
So and no other , as yourself commanded :
Which not to have done I think had been in me 
Both disobedience and ingratitude 
To you and toward your friend , whose love had spoke ,
Even since it could speak , from an infant , freely 
That it was yours . Now , for conspiracy ,
I know not how it tastes , though it be dish'd 
For me to try how : all I know of it 
Is that Camillo was an honest man ;
And why he left your court , the gods themselves ,
Wotting no more than I , are ignorant .

You knew of his departure , as you know 
What you have underta'en to do in's absence .

Sir ,
You speak a language that I understand not :
My life stands in the level of your dreams ,
Which I'll lay down .

Your actions are my dreams :
You had a bastard by Polixenes ,
And I but dream'd it . As you were past all shame ,
Those of your fact are so ,so past all truth :
Which to deny concerns more than avails ; for as 
Thy brat hath been cast out , like to itself ,
No father owning it ,which is , indeed ,
More criminal in thee than it ,so thou 
Shalt feel our justice , in whose easiest passage 
Look for no less than death .

Sir , spare your threats :
The bug which you would fright me with I seek .
To me can life be no commodity :
The crown and comfort of my life , your favour ,
I do give lost ; for I do feel it gone ,
But know not how it went . My second joy ,
And first-fruits of my body , from his presence 
I am barr'd , like one infectious . My third comfort ,
Starr'd most unluckily , is from my breast ,
The innocent milk in its most innocent mouth ,
Hal'd out to murder : myself on every post 
Proclaim'd a strumpet : with immodest hatred 
The child-bed privilege denied , which 'longs 
To women of all fashion : lastly , hurried 
Here to this place , i'the open air , before 
I have got strength of limit . Now , my liege ,
Tell me what blessings I have here alive ,
That I should fear to die ? Therefore proceed .
But yet hear this ; mistake me not ; no life ,
I prize it not a straw :but for mine honour ,
Which I would free , if I shall be condemn'd 
Upon surmises , all proofs sleeping else 
But what your jealousies awake , I tell you 
'Tis rigour and not law . Your honours all ,
I do refer me to the oracle :
Apollo be my judge !

This your request 
Is altogether just : therefore , bring forth ,
And in Apollo's name , his oracle .


The Emperor of Russia was my father :
O ! that he were alive , and here beholding 
His daughter's trial ; that he did but see 
The flatness of my misery ; yet with eyes 
Of pity , not revenge !


You here shall swear upon this sword of justice ,
That you , Cleomenes and Dion , have 
Been both at Delphos , and from thence have brought 
This seal'd-up oracle , by the hand deliver'd 
Of great Apollo's priest , and that since then 
You have not dar'd to break the holy seal ,
Nor read the secrets in't .

All this we swear .

All this we swear .

Break up the seals , and read .

Hermione is chaste ; Polixenes blameless ; Camillo a true subject ; Leontes a jealous tyrant ; his innocent babe truly begotten ; and the king shall live without an heir if that which is lost be not found !

Now blessed be the great Apollo !

Praised !

Hast thou read truth ?

Ay , my lord ; even so 
As it is here set down .

There is no truth at all i' the oracle :
The sessions shall proceed : this is mere falsehood .


My lord the king , the king !

What is the business ?

O sir ! I shall be hated to report it :
The prince your son , with mere conceit and fear 
Of the queen's speed , is gone .

How ! gone !

Is dead .

Apollo's angry ; and the heavens themselves 
Do strike at my injustice .

How now , there !

This news is mortal to the queen : look down ,
And see what death is doing .

Take her hence :
Her heart is but o'ercharg'd ; she will recover :
I have too much believ'd mine own suspicion :
Beseech you , tenderly apply to her 
Some remedies for life .

Apollo , pardon 
My great profaneness 'gainst thine oracle !
I'll reconcile me to Polixenes ,
New woo my queen , recall the good Camillo ,
Whom I proclaim a man of truth , of mercy ;
For , being transported by my jealousies 
To bloody thoughts and to revenge , I chose 
Camillo for the minister to poison 
My friend Polixenes : which had been done ,
But that the good mind of Camillo tardied 
My swift command ; though I with death and with 
Reward did threaten and encourage him ,
Not doing it , and being done : he , most humane 
And fill'd with honour , to my kingly guest 
Unclasp'd my practice , quit his fortunes here ,
Which you knew great , and to the certain hazard 
Of all incertainties himself commended ,
No richer than his honour : how he glisters 
Thorough my rust ! and how his piety 
Does my deeds make the blacker !


Woe the while !
O , cut my lace , lest my heart , cracking it ,
Break too !

What fit is this , good lady ?

What studied torments , tyrant , hast for me ?
What wheels ? racks ? fires ? What flaying ? or what boiling 
In leads , or oils ? what old or newer torture 
Must I receive , whose every word deserves 
To taste of thy most worst ? Thy tyranny ,
Together working with thy jealousies ,
Fancies too weak for boys , too green and idle 
For girls of nine , O ! think what they have done ,
And then run mad indeed , stark mad ; for all 
Thy by-gone fooleries were but spices of it .
That thou betray'dst Polixenes , 'twas nothing ;
That did but show thee of a fool , inconstant 
And damnable ingrateful ; nor was't much 
Thou wouldst have poison'd good Camillo's honour 
To have him kill a king ; poor trespasses ,
More monstrous standing by : whereof I reckon 
The casting forth to crows thy baby daughter 
To be or none or little ; though a devil 
Would have shed water out of fire ere done't :
Nor is't directly laid to thee , the death 
Of the young prince , whose honourable thoughts ,
Thoughts high for one so tender ,cleft the heart 
That could conceive a gross and foolish sire 
Blemish'd his gracious dam : this is not , no ,
Laid to thy answer : but the last ,O lords !
When I have said , cry , 'woe !' the queen , the queen ,
The sweetest , dearest creature's dead , and vengeance for't 
Not dropp'd down yet .

The higher powers forbid !

I say she's dead ; I'll swear't : if word nor oath 
Prevail not , go and see : if you can bring 
Tincture or lustre in her lip , her eye ,
Heat outwardly , or breath within , I'll serve you 
As I would do the gods . But , O thou tyrant !
Do not repent these things , for they are heavier 
Than all thy woes can stir ; therefore betake thee 
To nothing but despair . A thousand knees 
Ten thousand years together , naked , fasting ,
Upon a barren mountain , and still winter 
In storm perpetual , could not move the gods 
To look that way thou wert .

Go on , go on ;
Thou canst not speak too much : I have deserv'd 
All tongues to talk their bitterest .

Say no more :
Howe'er the business goes , you have made fault 
I' the boldness of your speech .

I am sorry for't :
All faults I make , when I shall come to know them ,
I do repent . Alas ! I have show'd too much 
The rashness of a woman : he is touch'd 
To the noble heart . What's gone and what's past help 
Should be past grief : do not receive affliction 
At my petition ; I beseech you , rather 
Let me be punish'd , that have minded you 
Of what you should forget . Now , good my liege ,
Sir , royal sir , forgive a foolish woman :
The love I bore your queen ,lo , fool again !
I'll speak of her no more , nor of your children ;
I'll not remember you of my own lord ,
Who is lost too : take your patience to you ,
And I'll say nothing .

Thou didst speak but well ,
When most the truth , which I receive much better 
Than to be pitied of thee . Prithee , bring me 
To the dead bodies of my queen and son :
One grave shall be for both : upon them shall 
The causes of their death appear , unto 
Our shame perpetual . Once a day I'll visit 
The chapel where they lie , and tears shed there 
Shall be my recreation : so long as nature 
Will bear up with this exercise , so long 
I daily vow to use it . Come and lead me 
Unto these sorrows .


Thou art perfect , then , our ship hath touch'd upon 
The desarts of Bohemia ?

Ay , my lord ; and fear 
We have landed in ill time : the skies look grimly 
And threaten present blusters . In my conscience ,
The heavens with that we have in hand are angry ,
And frown upon's .

Their sacred wills be done ! Go , get aboard ;
Look to thy bark : I'll not be long before 
I call upon thee .

Make your best haste , and go not 
Too far i' the land : 'tis like to be loud weather ;
Besides , this place is famous for the creatures 
Of prey that keep upon't .

Go thou away :
I'll follow instantly .

I am glad at heart 
To be so rid of the business .


Come , poor babe :
I have heard , but not believ'd , the spirits o' the dead 
May walk again : if such thing be , thy mother 
Appear'd to me last night , for ne'er was dream 
So like a waking . To me comes a creature ,
Sometimes her head on one side , some another ;
I never saw a vessel of like sorrow ,
So fill'd , and so becoming : in pure white robes ,
Like very sanctity , she did approach 
My cabin where I lay ; thrice bow'd before me ,
And , gasping to begin some speech , her eyes 
Became two spouts : the fury spent , anon 
Did this break from her : 'Good Antigonus ,
Since fate , against thy better disposition ,
Hath made thy person for the thrower-out 
Of my poor babe , according to thine oath ,
Places remote enough are in Bohemia ,
There weep and leave it crying ; and , for the babe 
Is counted lost for ever , Perdita ,
I prithee , call't : for this ungentle business ,
Put on thee by my lord , thou ne'er shalt see 
Thy wife Paulina more :' and so , with shrieks ,
She melted into air . Affrighted much ,
I did in time collect myself , and thought 
This was so and no slumber . Dreams are toys ;
Yet for this once , yea , superstitiously ,
I will be squar'd by this . I do believe 
Hermione hath suffer'd death ; and that 
Apollo would , this being indeed the issue 
Of King Polixenes , it should here be laid ,
Either for life or death , upon the earth 
Of its right father . Blossom , speed thee well !

There lie ; and there thy character : there these ;

Which may , if fortune please , both breed thee , pretty ,
And still rest thine . The storm begins : poor wretch !
That for thy mother's fault art thus expos'd 
To loss and what may follow . Weep I cannot ,
But my heart bleeds , and most accurs'd am I 
To be by oath enjoin'd to this . Farewell !
The day frowns more and more : thou art like to have 
A lullaby too rough . I never saw 
The heavens so dim by day . A savage clamour !
Well may I get aboard ! This is the chase :
I am gone for ever .

I would there were no age between sixteen and three-and-twenty , or that youth would sleep out the rest ; for there is nothing in the between but getting wenches with child , wronging the ancientry , stealing , fighting . Hark you now ! Would any but these boiled brains of nineteen and two-and-twenty hunt this weather ? They have scared away two of my best sheep ; which I fear the wolf will sooner find than the master : if anywhere I have them , 'tis by the sea-side , browsing of ivy . Good luck , an't be thy will ! what have we here ?

Mercy on's , a barne ; a very pretty barne ! A boy or a child , I wonder ? A pretty one ; a very pretty one ; sure some scape : though I am not bookish , yet I can read waiting-gentlewoman in the scape . This has been some stair-work , some trunk-work , some behind-door-work ; they were warmer that got this than the poor thing is here . I'll take it up for pity ; yet I'll tarry till my son come ; he hollaed but even now . Whoa , ho , hoa !


Hilloa , loa !

What ! art so near ? If thou'lt see a thing to talk on when thou art dead and rotten , come hither . What ailest thou , man ?

I have seen two such sights by sea and by land ! but I am not to say it is a see , for it is now the sky : betwixt the firmament and it you cannot thrust a bodkin's point .

Why , boy , how is it ?

I would you did but see how it chafes , how it rages , how it takes up the shore ! but that's not to the point . O ! the most piteous cry of the poor souls ; sometimes to see 'em , and not to see 'em ; now the ship boring the moon with her mainmast , and anon swallowed with yest and froth , as you'd thrust a cork into a hogshead . And then for the land-service : to see how the bear tore out his shoulderbone ; how he cried to me for help and said his name was Antigonus , a nobleman . But to make an end of the ship : to see how the sea flap-dragoned it : but , first , how the poor souls roared , and the sea mocked them ; and how the poor gentleman roared , and the bear mocked him , both roaring louder than the sea or weather .

Name of mercy ! when was this , boy ?

Now , now ; I have not winked since I saw these sights : the men are not yet cold under water , nor the bear half dined on the gentleman : he's at it now .

Would I had been by , to have helped the old man !

I would you had been by the ship's side , to have helped her : there your charity would have lacked footing .

Heavy matters ! heavy matters ! but look thee here , boy . Now bless thyself : thou mettest with things dying , I with things new born . Here's a sight for thee ; look thee , a bearing-cloth for a squire's child ! Look thee here : take up , take up , boy ; open't . So , let's see : it was told me , I should be rich by the fairies : this is some changeling .Open't . What's within , boy ?

You're a made old man : if the sins of your youth are forgiven you , you're well to live . Gold ! all gold !

This is fairy gold , boy , and 'twill prove so : up with't , keep it close : home , home , the next way . We are lucky , boy ; and to be so still , requires nothing but secrecy . Let my sheep go . Come , good boy , the next way home .

Go you the next way with your findings . I'll go see if the bear be gone from the gentleman , and how much he hath eaten : they are never curst but when they are hungry . If there be any of him left , I'll bury it .

That's a good deed . If thou mayst discern by that which is left of him what he is , fetch me to the sight of him .

Marry , will I ; and you shall help to put him i' the ground .

'Tis a lucky day , boy , and we'll do good deeds on't .

I , that please some , try all , both joy and terror 
Of good and bad , that make and unfold error ,
Now take upon me , in the name of Time ,
To use my wings . Impute it not a crime 
To me or my swift passage , that I slide 
O'er sixteen years , and leave the growth untried 
Of that wide gap ; since it is in my power 
To o'erthrow law , and in one self-born hour 
To plant and o'erwhelm custom . Let me pass 
The same I am , ere ancient'st order was 
Or what is now receiv'd : I witness to 
The times that brought them in ; so shall I do 
To the freshest things now reigning , and make stale 
The glistering of this present , as my tale 
Now seems to it . Your patience this allowing ,
I turn my glass and give my scene such growing 
As you had slept between . Leontes leaving ,
The effects of his fond jealousies so grieving ,
That he shuts up himself ,imagine me ,
Gentle spectators , that I now may be 
In fair Bohemia ; and remember well ,
I mention'd a son o' the king's , which Florizel 
I now name to you ; and with speed so pace 
To speak of Perdita , now grown in grace 
Equal with wondering : what of her ensues 
I list not prophesy ; but let Time's news 
Be known when 'tis brought forth . A shepherd's daughter ,
And what to her adheres , which follows after ,
Is th' argument of Time . Of this allow ,
If ever you have spent time worse ere now :
If never , yet that Time himself doth say 
He wishes earnestly you never may .

I pray thee , good Camillo , be no more importunate : 'tis a sickness denying thee anything ; a death to grant this .

It is fifteen years since I saw my country : though I have for the most part been aired abroad , I desire to lay my bones there . Besides , the penitent king , my master , hath sent for me ; to whose feeling sorrows I might be some allay , or I o'erween to think so , which is another spur to my departure .

As thou lovest me , Camillo , wipe not out the rest of thy services by leaving me now . The need I have of thee thine own goodness hath made : better not to have had thee than thus to want thee . Thou , having made me businesses which none without thee can sufficiently manage , must either stay to execute them thyself or take away with thee the very services thou hast done ; which if I have not enough considered ,as too much I cannot ,to be more thankful to thee shall be my study , and my profit therein , the heaping friendships . Of that fatal country , Sicilia , prithee speak no more , whose very naming punishes me with the remembrance of that penitent , as thou callest him , and reconciled king , my brother ; whose loss of his most precious queen and children are even now to be afresh lamented . Say to me , when sawest thou the Prince Florizel , my son ? Kings are no less unhappy , their issue not being gracious , than they are in losing them when they have approved their virtues .

Sir , it is three days since I saw the prince . What his happier affairs may be , are to me unknown ; but I have missingly noted he is of late much retired from court , and is less frequent to his princely exercises than formerly he hath appeared .

I have considered so much , Camillo , and with some care ; so far , that I have eyes under my service which look upon his removedness ; from whom I have this intelligence , that he is seldom from the house of a most homely shepherd ; a man , they say , that from very nothing , and beyond the imagination of his neighbours , is grown into an unspeakable estate .

I have heard , sir , of such a man , who hath a daughter of most rare note : the report of her is extended more than can be thought to begin from such a cottage .

That's likewise part of my intelligence ; but I fear , the angle that plucks our son thither . Thou shalt accompany us to the place ; where we will , not appearing what we are , have some question with the shepherd ; from whose simplicity I think it not uneasy to get the cause of my son's resort thither . Prithee , be my present partner in this business , and lay aside the thoughts of Sicilia .

I willingly obey your command .

My best Camillo !We must disguise ourselves .

When daffodils begin to peer ,
With heigh ! the doxy , over the dale ,
Why , then comes in the sweet o' the year ;
For the red blood reigns in the winter's pale .


The white sheet bleaching on the hedge ,
With heigh ! the sweet birds , O , how they sing !
Doth set my pugging tooth on edge ;
For a quart of ale is a dish for a king 


The lark , that tirra-lirra chants ,
With , heigh ! with , heigh ! the thrush and the jay ,
Are summer songs for me and my aunts ,
While we lie tumbling in the hay .


I have served Prince Florizel , and in my time wore three-pile ; but now I am out of service :

But shall I go mourn for that , my dear ?
The pale moon shines by night ;
And when I wander here and there ,
I then do most go right .
If tinkers may have leave to live ,
And bear the sow-skin bowget ,
Then my account I well may give ,
And in the stocks avouch it 

My traffic is sheets ; when the kite builds , look to lesser linen . My father named me Autolycus ; who being , as I am , littered under Mercury , was likewise a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles . With die and drab I purchased this caparison , and my revenue is the silly cheat . Gallows and knock are too powerful on the highway : beating and hanging are terrors to me : for the life to come , I sleep out the thought of it . A prize ! a prize !


Let me see : Every 'leven wether tods ; every tod yields pound and odd shilling : fifteen hundred shorn , what comes the wool to ?

If the springe hold , the cock's mine .

I cannot do't without compters . Let me see ; what am I to buy for our sheep-shearing feast ? 'Three pound of sugar ; five pound of currants ; rice ,' what will this sister of mine do with rice ? But my father hath made her mistress of the feast , and she lays it on . She hath made me four-and-twenty nosegays for the shearers , three-man song-men all , and very good ones ; but they are most of them means and bases : but one puritan amongst them , and he sings psalms to hornpipes . I must have saffron , to colour the warden pies ; mace , dates ,none ; that's out of my note :nutmegs seven ; a race or two of ginger ,but that I may beg ;four pound of prunes , and as many of raisins o' the sun .

O ! that ever I was born !


I' the name of me !

O ! help me , help me ! pluck but off these rags , and then death , death !

Alack , poor soul ! thou hast need of more rags to lay on thee , rather than have these off .

O , sir ! the loathsomeness of them offends me more than the stripes I have received , which are mighty ones and millions .

Alas , poor man ! a million of beating may come to a great matter .

I am robbed , sir , and beaten ; my money and apparel ta'en from me , and these detestable things put upon me .

What , by a horseman or a footman ?

A footman , sweet sir , a footman .

Indeed , he should be a footman , by the garments he hath left with thee : if this be a horseman's coat , it hath seen very hot service . Lend me thy hand , I'll help thee : come , lend me thy hand .


O ! good sir , tenderly , O !

Alas , poor soul !

O ! good sir ; softly , good sir ! I fear , sir , my shoulder-blade is out .

How now ! canst stand ?

Softly , dear sir ;

good sir , softly . You ha' done me a charitable office .

Dost lack any money ? I have a little money for thee .

No , good sweet sir : no , I beseech you , sir . I have a kinsman not past three-quarters of a mile hence , unto whom I was going : I shall there have money , or anything I want : offer me no money , I pray you ! that kills my heart .

What manner of fellow was he that robbed you ?

A fellow , sir , that I have known to go about with trol-my-dames : I knew him once a servant of the prince . I cannot tell , good sir , for which of his virtues it was , but he was certainly whipped out of the court .

His vices , you would say : there's no virtue whipped out of the court : they cherish it , to make it stay there , and yet it will no more but abide .

Vices , I would say , sir . I know this man well : he hath been since an ape-bearer ; then a process-server , a bailiff ; then he compassed a motion of the Prodigal Son , and married a tinker's wife within a mile where my land and living lies ; and having flown over many knavish professions , he settled only in rogue : some call him Autolycus .

Out upon him ! Prig , for my life , prig : he haunts wakes , fairs , and bear-baitings .

Very true , sir ; he , sir , he : that's the rogue that put me into this apparel .

Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia : if you had but looked big and spit at him , he'd have run .

I must confess to you , sir , I am no fighter : I am false of heart that way , and that he knew , I warrant him .

How do you now ?

Sweet sir , much better than I was : I can stand and walk . I will even take my leave of you , and pace softly towards my kinsman's .

Shall I bring thee on the way ?

No , good-faced sir ; no , sweet sir .

Then fare thee well : I must go buy spices for our sheep-shearing .

Prosper you , sweet sir !

Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice . I'll be with you at your sheep-shearing too . If I make not this cheat bring out another , and the shearers prove sheep , let me be unrolled , and my name put in the book of virtue .

Jog on , jog on , the footpath way ,
And merrily hent the stile-a :
A merry heart goes all the day ,
Your sad tares in a mile-a .

These your unusual weeds to each part of you 
Do give a life : no shepherdess , but Flora 
Peering in April's front . This your sheep-shearing 
Is as a meeting of the petty gods ,
And you the queen on't .

Sir , my gracious lord ,
To chide at your extremes it not becomes me :
O ! pardon , that I name them . Your high self ,
The gracious mark o' the land , you have obscur'd 
With a swain's wearing , and me , poor lowly maid ,
Most goddess-like prank'd up . But that our feasts 
In every mess have folly , and the feeders 
Digest it with a custom , I should blush 
To see you so attired ,swoon , I think ,
To show myself a glass .

I bless the time 
When my good falcon made her flight across 
Thy father's ground .

Now , Jove afford you cause !
To me the difference forges dread ; your greatness 
Hath not been us'd to fear . Even now I tremble 
To think , your father , by some accident ,
Should pass this way as you did . O , the Fates !
How would he look , to see his work , so noble ,
Vilely bound up ? What would he say ? Or how 
Should I , in these my borrow'd flaunts , behold 
The sternness of his presence ?

Apprehend 
Nothing but jollity . The gods themselves ,
Humbling their deities to love , have taken 
The shapes of beasts upon them : Jupiter 
Became a bull , and bellow'd ; the green Neptune 
A ram , and bleated ; and the fire-rob'd god ,
Golden Apollo , a poor humble swain ,
As I seem now . Their transformations 
Were never for a piece of beauty rarer ,
Nor in a way so chaste , since my desires 
Run not before mine honour , nor my lusts 
Burn hotter than my faith .

O ! but , sir ,
Your resolution cannot hold , when 'tis 
Oppos'd , as it must be , by the power of the king .
One of these two must be necessities ,
Which then will speak , that you must change this purpose ,
Or I my life .

Thou dearest Perdita ,
With these forc'd thoughts , I prithee , darken not 
The mirth o' the feast : or I'll be thine , my fair ,
Or not my father's ; for I cannot be 
Mine own , nor anything to any , if 
I be not thine : to this I am most constant ,
Though destiny say no . Be merry , gentle ;
Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing 
That you behold the while . Your guests are coming :
Lift up your countenance , as it were the day 
Of celebration of that nuptial which 
We two have sworn shall come .

O lady Fortune ,
Stand you auspicious !

See , your guests approach :
Address yourself to entertain them sprightly ,
And let's be red with mirth .


Fie , daughter ! when my old wife liv'd , upon 
This day she was both pantler , butler , cook ;
Both dame and servant ; welcom'd all , serv'd all ,
Would sing her song and dance her turn ; now here ,
At upper end o' the table , now i' the middle ;
On his shoulder , and his ; her face o' fire 
With labour and the thing she took to quench it ,
She would to each one sip . You are retir'd ,
As if you were a feasted one and not 
The hostess of the meeting : pray you , bid 
These unknown friends to's welcome ; for it is 
A way to make us better friends , more known .
Come , quench your blushes and present yourself 
That which you are , mistress o' the feast : come on ,
And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing ,
As your good flock shall prosper .

Sir , welcome :
It is my father's will I should take on me 
The hostess-ship o' the day :

You're welcome , sir .
Give me those flowers there , Dorcas . Reverend sirs ,
For you there's rosemary and rue ; these keep 
Seeming and savour all the winter long :
Grace and remembrance be to you both ,
And welcome to our shearing !

Shepherdess ,
A fair one are you ,well you fit our ages 
With flowers of winter .

Sir , the year growing ancient ,
Not yet on summer's death , nor on the birth 
Of trembling winter , the fairest flowers o' the season 
Are our carnations , and streak'd gillyvors ,
Which some call nature's bastards : of that kind 
Our rustic garden's barren , and I care not 
To get slips of them .

Wherefore , gentle maiden ,
Do you neglect them ?

For I have heard it said 
There is an art which in their piedness shares 
With great creating nature .

Say there be ;
Yet nature is made better by no mean 
But nature makes that mean : so , over that art ,
Which you say adds to nature , is an art 
That nature makes . You see , sweet maid , we marry 
A gentler scion to the wildest stock ,
And make conceive a bark of baser kind 
By bud of nobler race : this is an art 
Which does mend nature , change it rather , but 
The art itself is nature .

So it is .

Then make your garden rich in gillyvors ,
And do not call them bastards .

I'll not put 
The dibble in earth to set one slip of them ;
No more than , were I painted , I would wish 
This youth should say , 'twere well , and only therefore 
Desire to breed by me . Here's flowers for you ;
Hot lavender , mints , savory , marjoram ;
The marigold , that goes to bed wi' the sun ,
And with him rises weeping : these are flowers 
Of middle summer , and I think they are given 
To men of middle age . You're very welcome .

I should leave grazing , were I of your flock ,
And only live by gazing .

Out , alas !
You'd be so lean , that blasts of January 
Would blow you through and through . Now , my fair'st friend ,
I would I had some flowers o' the spring that might 
Become your time of day ; and yours , and yours ,
That wear upon your virgin branches yet 
Your maidenheads growing : O Proserpina !
For the flowers now that frighted thou let'st fall 
From Dis's waggon ! daffodils ,
That come before the swallow dares , and take 
The winds of March with beauty ; violets dim ,
But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes 
Or Cytherea's breath ; pale prime-roses ,
That die unmarried , ere they can behold 
Bright Ph bus in his strength , a malady 
Most incident to maids ; bold oxlips and 
The crown imperial ; lilies of all kinds ,
The flower-de-luce being one . O ! these I lack 
To make you garlands of , and my sweet friend ,
To strew him o'er and o'er !

What ! like a corse ?

No , like a bank for love to lie and play on ;
Not like a corse ; or if ,not to be buried ,
But quick and in mine arms . Come , take your flowers :
Methinks I play as I have seen them do 
In Whitsun pastorals : sure this robe of mine 
Does change my disposition .

What you do 
Still betters what is done . When you speak , sweet ,
I'd have you do it ever : when you sing ,
I'd have you buy and sell so ; so give alms ;
Pray so ; and , for the ordering your affairs ,
To sing them too : when you do dance , I wish you 
A wave o' the sea , that you might ever do 
Nothing but that ; move still , still so ,
And own no other function : each your doing ,
So singular in each particular ,
Crowns what you are doing in the present deed ,
That all your acts are queens .

O Doricles !
Your praises are too large : but that your youth ,
And the true blood which fairly peeps through it ,
Do plainly give you out an unstain'd shepherd ,
With wisdom I might fear , my Doricles ,
You woo'd me the false way .

I think you have 
As little skill to fear as I have purpose 
To put you to't . But , come ; our dance , I pray .
Your hand , my Perdita : so turtles pair 
That never mean to part .

I'll swear for 'em .

This is the prettiest low-born lass that ever 
Ran on the green-sord : nothing she does or seems 
But smacks of something greater than herself ;
Too noble for this place .

He tells her something 
That makes her blood look out . Good sooth , she is 
The queen of curds and cream .

Come on , strike up .

Mopsa must be your mistress : marry , garlic ,
To mend her kissing with .

Now , in good time !

Not a word , a word : we stand upon our manners .
Come , strike up .


Pray , good shepherd , what fair swain is this 
Which dances with your daughter ?

They call him Doricles , and boasts himself 
To have a worthy feeding ; but I have it 
Upon his own report and I believe it :
He looks like sooth . He says he loves my daughter :
I think so too ; for never gaz'd the moon 
Upon the water as he'll stand and read 
As 'twere my daughter's eyes ; and , to be plain ,
I think there is not half a kiss to choose 
Who loves another best .

She dances featly .

So she does any thing , though I report it 
That should be silent . If young Doricles 
Do light upon her , she shall bring him that 
Which he not dreams of .


O master ! if you did but hear the pedlar at the door , you would never dance again after a tabor and pipe ; no , the bagpipe could not move you . He sings several tunes faster than you'll tell money ; he utters them as he had eaten ballads and all men's ears grew to his tunes .

He could never come better : he shall come in : I love a ballad but even too well , if it be doleful matter merrily set down , or a very pleasant thing indeed and sung lamentably .

He hath songs for man or woman , of all sizes ; no milliner can so fit his customers with gloves : he has the prettiest love-songs for maids ; so without bawdry , which is strange ; with such delicate burthens of dildos and fadings , 'jump her and thump her ;' and where some stretchmouthed rascal would , as it were , mean mischief and break a foul gap into the matter , he makes the maid to answer , 'Whoop , do me no harm , good man ;' puts him off , slights him with 'Whoop , do me no harm , good man .' 

This is a brave fellow .

Believe me , thou talkest of an admirable conceited fellow . Has he any unbraided wares ?

He hath ribands of all the colours i' the rainbow ; points more than all the lawyers in Bohemia can learnedly handle , though they come to him by the gross ; inkles , caddisses , cambrics , lawns : why , he sings 'em over , as they were gods or goddesses . You would think a smock were a she-angel , he so chants to the sleeve-hand and the work about the square on't .

Prithee , bring him in , and let him approach singing .

Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in's tunes .


You have of these pedlars , that have more in them than you'd think , sister .

Ay , good brother , or go about to think .

Lawn as white as driven snow ;
Cyprus black as e'er was crow ;
Gloves as sweet as damask roses ;
Masks for faces and for noses ;
Bugle-bracelet , necklace-amber ,
Perfume for a lady's chamber ;
Golden quoifs and stomachers ,
For my lads to give their dears ;
Pins and poking-sticks of steel ;
What maids lack from head to heel :
Come buy of me , come ; come buy , come buy ;
Buy , lads , or else your lasses cry :
Come buy .

If I were not in love with Mopsa , thou shouldst take no money of me ; but being enthralled as I am , it will also be the bondage of certain ribands and gloves .

I was promised them against the feast ; but they come not too late now .

He hath promised you more than that , or there be liars .

He hath paid you all he promised you : may be he has paid you more , which will shame you to give him again .

Is there no manners left among maids ? will they wear their plackets where they should bear their faces ? Is there not milking-time , when you are going to bed , or kiln-hole , to whistle off these secrets , but you must be tittle-tattling before all our guests ? 'Tis well they are whispering : clamour your tongues , and not a word more .

I have done . Come , you promised me a tawdry lace and a pair of sweet gloves .

Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the way , and lost all my money ?

And indeed , sir , there are cozeners abroad ; therefore it behoves men to be wary .

Fear not thou , man , thou shalt lose nothing here .

I hope so , sir ; for I have about me many parcels of charge .

What hast here ? ballads ?

Pray now , buy some : I love a ballad in print , a-life , for then we are sure they are true .

Here's one to a very doleful tune , how a usurer's wife was brought to bed of twenty money-bags at a burden ; and how she longed to eat adders' heads and toads carbonadoed .

Is it true , think you ?

Very true , and but a month old .

Bless me from marrying a usurer !

Here's the midwife's name to't , one Mistress Taleporter , and five or six honest wives' that were present . Why should I carry lies abroad ?

Pray you now , buy it .

Come on , lay it by : and let's first see moe ballads ; we'll buy the other things anon .

Here's another ballad of a fish that appeared upon the coast on Wednesday the fourscore of April , forty thousand fathom above water , and sung this ballad against the hard hearts of maids : it was thought she was a woman and was turned into a cold fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that loved her . The ballad is very pitiful and as true .

Is it true too , think you ?

Five justices' hands at it , and witnesses more than my pack will hold .

Lay it by too : another .

This is a merry ballad , but a very pretty one .

Let's have some merry ones .

Why , this is a passing merry one , and goes to the tune of 'Two maids wooing a man :' there's scarce a maid westward but she sings it : 'tis in request , I can tell you .

We can both sing it : if thou'lt bear a part thou shalt hear ; 'tis in three parts .

We had the tune on't a month ago .

I can bear my part ; you must know 'tis my occupation : have at it with you .


Get you hence , for I must go ,
Where it fits not you to know .

Whither ?

O ! whither ?

Whither ?

It becomes thy oath full woll ,
Thou to me thy secrets tell .

Me too : let me go thither .

Or thou go'st to the grange or mill .

If to either , thou dost ill .

Neither .

What , neither ?

Neither .

Thou hast sworn my love to be 

Thou hast sworn it more to me :
Then whither go'st ? say whither ?


We'll have this song out anon by ourselves : my father and the gentlemen are in sad talk , and we'll not trouble them : come , bring away thy pack after me . Wenches , I'll buy for you both . Pedlar , let's have the first choice . Follow me , girls .


And you shall pay well for 'em .

Will you buy any tape ,
Or lace for your cape ,
My dainty duck , my dear-a ?
Any silk , any thread ,
Any toys for your head ,
Of the new'st and fin'st , fin'st wear-a ?
Come to the pedlar ;
Money's a meddler ,
That doth utter all men's ware-a .


Master , there is three carters , three shepherds , three neat-herds , three swine-herds , that have made themselves all men of hair ; they call themselves Saltiers ; and they have a dance which the wenches say is a gallimaufry of gambols , because they are not in't ; but they themselves are o' the mind ,if it be not too rough for some that know little but bowling ,it will please plentifully .

Away ! we'll none on't : here has been too much homely foolery already . I know , sir , we weary you .

You weary those that refresh us : pray , let's see these four threes of herdsmen .

One three of them , by their own report , sir , hath danced before the king ; and not the worst of the three but jumps twelve foot and a half by the squier .

Leave your prating : since these good men are pleased let them come in : but quickly now .

Why , they stay at door , sir .

O , father ! you'll know more of that hereafter .


Is it not too far gone ? 'Tis time to part them .
He's simple and tells much .

How now , fair shepherd !
Your heart is full of something that does take 
Your mind from feasting . Sooth , when I was young ,
And handed love as you do , I was wont 
To load my she with knacks : I would have ransack'd 
The pedlar's silken treasury and have pour'd it 
To her acceptance ; you have let him go 
And nothing marted with him . If your lass 
Interpretation should abuse and call this 
Your lack of love or bounty , you were straited 
For a reply , at least if you make a care 
Of happy holding her .

Old sir , I know 
She prizes not such trifles as these are .
The gifts she looks from me are pack'd and lock'd 
Up in my heart , which I have given already ,
But not deliver'd . O ! hear me breathe my life 
Before this ancient sir , who , it should seem ,
Hath sometime lov'd : I take thy hand ; this hand ,
As soft as dove's down , and as white as it ,
Or Ethiopian's tooth , or the fann'd snow 
That's bolted by the northern blasts twice o'er .

What follows this ?
How prettily the young swain seems to wash 
The hand was fair before ! I have put you out :
But to your protestation : let me hear 
What you profess .

Do , and be witness to't .

And this my neighbour too ?

And he , and more 
Than he , and men , the earth , the heavens , and all ;
That , were I crown'd the most imperial monarch ,
Thereof most worthy , were I the fairest youth 
That ever made eye swerve , had force and knowledge 
More than was ever man's , I would not prize them 
Without her love : for her employ them all ;
Commend them and condemn them to her service 
Or to their own perdition .

Fairly offer'd .

This shows a sound affection .

But , my daughter ,
Say you the like to him ?

I cannot speak 
So well , nothing so well ; no , nor mean better :
By the pattern of mine own thoughts I cut out 
The purity of his .

Take hands ; a bargain ;
And , friends unknown , you shall bear witness to't :
I give my daughter to him , and will make 
Her portion equal his .

O ! that must be 
I' the virtue of your daughter : one being dead ,
I shall have more than you can dream of yet ;
Enough then for your wonder . But , come on ;
Contract us 'fore these witnesses .

Come , your hand ;
And , daughter , yours .

Soft , swain , awhile , beseech you .
Have you a father ?

I have ; but what of him ?

Knows he of this ?

He neither does nor shall .

Methinks a father 
Is , at the nuptial of his son , a guest 
That best becomes the table . Pray you , once more ,
Is not your father grown incapable 
Of reasonable affairs ? is he not stupid 
With age and altering rheums ? can he speak ? hear ?
Know man from man ? dispute his own estate ?
Lies he not bed-rid ? and again does nothing 
But what he did being childish ?

No , good sir :
He has his health and ampler strength indeed 
Than most have of his age .

By my white beard ,
You offer him , if this be so , a wrong 
Something unfilial . Reason my son 
Should choose himself a wife , but as good reason 
The father ,all whose joy is nothing else 
But fair posterity ,should hold some counsel 
In such a business .

I yield all this ;
But for some other reasons , my grave sir ,
Which 'tis not fit you know , I not acquaint 
My father of this business .

Let him know't .

He shall not .

Prithee , let him .

No , he must not .

Let him , my son : he shall not need to grieve 
At knowing of thy choice .

Come , come , he must not .
Mark our contract .

Mark your divorce , young sir ,

Whom son I dare not call : thou art too base 
To be acknowledg'd : thou a sceptre's heir ,
That thus affect'st a sheep-hook ! Thou old traitor ,
I am sorry that by hanging thee I can 
But shorten thy life one week . And thou , fresh piece 
Of excellent witchcraft , who of force must know 
The royal fool thou cop'st with ,

O , my heart !

I'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers , and made 
More homely than thy state . For thee , fond boy ,
If I may ever know thou dost but sigh 
That thou no more shalt see this knack ,as never 
I mean thou shalt ,we'll bar thee from succession ;
Not hold thee of our blood , no , not our kin ,
Far than Deucalion off : mark thou my words :
Follow us to the court . Thou , churl , for this time ,
Though full of our displeasure , yet we free thee 
From the dead blow of it . And you , enchantment ,
Worthy enough a herdsman ; yea , him too ,
That makes himself , but for our honour therein ,
Unworthy thee ,if ever henceforth thou 
These rural latches to his entrance open ,
Or hoop his body more with thy embraces ,
I will devise a death as cruel for thee 
As thou art tender to't .


Even here undone !
I was not much afeard ; for once or twice 
I was about to speak and tell him plainly ,
The self-same sun that shines upon his court 
Hides not his visage from our cottage , but 
Looks on alike . Will't please you , sir , be gone ?
I told you what would come of this : beseech you ,
Of your own state take care : this dream of mine 
Being now awake , I'll queen it no inch further ,
But milk my ewes and weep .

Why , how now , father !
Speak , ere thou diest .

I cannot speak , nor think ,
Nor dare to know that which I know . O sir !
You have undone a man of fourscore three ,
That thought to fill his grave in quiet , yea ,
To die upon the bed my father died ,
To lie close by his honest bones : but now 
Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me 
Where no priest shovels in dust . O cursed wretch !
That knew'st this was the prince , and wouldst adventure 
To mingle faith with him . Undone ! undone !
If I might die within this hour , I have liv'd 
To die when I desire .


Why look you so upon me ?
I am but sorry , not afeard ; delay'd ,
But nothing alter'd . What I was , I am :
More straining on for plucking back ; not following 
My leash unwillingly .

Gracious my lord ,
You know your father's temper : at this time 
He will allow no speech , which I do guess 
You do not purpose to him ; and as hardly 
Will he endure your sight as yet , I fear :
Then , till the fury of his highness settle ,
Come not before him .

I not purpose it .
I think , Camillo ?

Even he , my lord .

How often have I told you 'twould be thus !
How often said my dignity would last 
But till 'twere known !

It cannot fail but by 
The violation of my faith ; and then 
Let nature crush the sides o' the earth together 
And mar the seeds within ! Lift up thy looks :
From my succession wipe me , father ; I 
Am heir to my affection .

Be advis'd .

I am ; and by my fancy : if my reason 
Will thereto be obedient , I have reason ;
If not , my senses , better pleas'd with madness ,
Do bid it welcome .

This is desperate , sir .

So call it ; but it does fulfil my vow ,
I needs must think it honesty . Camillo ,
Not for Bohemia , nor the pomp that may 
Be thereat glean'd , for all the sun sees or 
The close earth wombs or the profound sea hides 
In unknown fathoms , will I break my oath 
To this my fair belov'd . Therefore , I pray you ,
As you have ever been my father's honour'd friend ,
When he shall miss me ,as , in faith , I mean not 
To see him any more ,cast your good counsels 
Upon his passion : let myself and fortune 
Tug for the time to come . This you may know 
And so deliver , I am put to sea 
With her whom here I cannot hold on shore ;
And most opportune to our need , I have 
A vessel rides fast by , but not prepar'd 
For this design . What course I mean to hold 
Shall nothing benefit your knowledge , nor 
Concern me the reporting .

O my lord !
I would your spirit were easier for advice ,
Or stronger for your need .

Hark , Perdita .


I'll hear you by and by .

He's irremovable ,
Resolv'd for flight . Now were I happy if 
His going I could frame to serve my turn ,
Save him from danger , do him love and honour ,
Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia 
And that unhappy king , my master , whom 
I so much thirst to see .

Now , good Camillo ,
I am so fraught with curious business that 
I leave out ceremony .

Sir , I think 
You have heard of my poor services , i' the love 
That I have borne your father ?

Very nobly 
Have you deserv'd : it is my father's music 
To speak your deeds , not little of his care 
To have them recompens'd as thought on .

Well , my lord ,
If you may please to think I love the king 
And through him what's nearest to him , which is 
Your gracious self , embrace but my direction ,
If your more ponderous and settled project 
May suffer alteration , on mine honour 
I'll point you where you shall have such receiving 
As shall become your highness ; where you may 
Enjoy your mistress ,from the whom , I see ,
There's no disjunction to be made , but by ,
As , heavens forfend ! your ruin ,marry her ;
And with my best endeavours in your absence 
Your discontenting father strive to qualify ,
And bring him up to liking .

How , Camillo ,
May this , almost a miracle , be done ?
That I may call thee something more than man ,
And , after that trust to thee .

Have you thought on 
A place whereto you'll go ?

Not any yet ;
But as the unthought-on accident is guilty 
To what we wildly do , so we profess 
Ourselves to be the slaves of chance and flies 
Of every wind that blows .

Then list to me :
This follows ; if you will not change your purpose 
But undergo this flight , make for Sicilia ,
And there present yourself and your fair princess ,
For so , I see , she must be ,'fore Leontes ;
She shall be habited as it becomes 
The partner of your bed . Methinks I see 
Leontes opening his free arms and weeping 
His welcomes forth ; asks thee , the son , forgiveness 
As 'twere i' the father's person ; kisses the hands 
Of your fresh princess ; o'er and o'er divides him 
'Twixt his unkindness and his kindness : the one 
He chides to hell , and bids the other grow 
Faster than thought or time .

Worthy Camillo ,
What colour for my visitation shall I 
Hold up before him ?

Sent by the king your father 
To greet him and to give him comforts . Sir ,
The manner of your bearing towards him , with 
What you as from your father shall deliver ,
Things known betwixt us three , I'll write you down :
The which shall point you forth at every sitting 
What you must say ; that he shall not perceive 
But that you have your father's bosom there 
And speak his very heart .

I am bound to you .
There is some sap in this .

A course more promising 
Than a wild dedication of yourselves 
To unpath'd waters , undream'd shores , most certain 
To miseries enough : no hope to help you ,
But as you shake off one to take another ;
Nothing so certain as your anchors , who 
Do their best office , if they can but stay you 
Where you'll be loath to be . Besides , you know 
Prosperity's the very bond of love ,
Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together 
Affliction alters .

One of these is true :
I think affliction may subdue the cheek ,
But not take in the mind .

Yea , say you so ?
There shall not at your father's house these seven years 
Be born another such .

My good Camillo ,
She is as forward of her breeding as 
She is i' the rear o' her birth .

I cannot say 'tis pity 
She lacks instructions , for she seems a mistress 
To most that teach .

Your pardon , sir ; for this 
I'll blush you thanks .

My prettiest Perdita !
But O ! the thorns we stand upon . Camillo ,
Preserver of my father , now of me ,
The med'cine of our house , how shall we do ?
We are not furnish'd like Bohemia's son ,
Nor shall appear in Sicilia .

My lord ,
Fear none of this : I think you know my fortunes 
Do all lie there : it shall be so my care 
To have you royally appointed as if 
The scene you play were mine . For instance , sir ,
That you may know you shall not want , one word .

Ha , ha ! what a fool Honesty is ! and Trust , his sworn brother , a very simple gentleman ! I have sold all my trumpery : not a counterfeit stone , not a riband , glass , pomander , brooch , table-book , ballad , knife , tape , glove , shoe-tie , bracelet , horn-ring , to keep my pack from fasting : they throng who should buy first , as if my trinkets had been hallowed and brought a benediction to the buyer : by which means I saw whose purse was best in picture ; and what I saw , to my good use I remembered . My clown ,who wants but something to be a reasonable man ,grew so in love with the wenches' song that he would not stir his pettitoes till he had both tune and words ; which so drew the rest of the herd to me that all their other senses stuck in ears : you might have pinched a placket , it was senseless ; 'twas nothing to geld a codpiece of a purse ; I would have filed keys off that hung in chains : no hearing , no feeling , but my sir's song , and admiring the nothing of it ; so that , in this time of lethargy I picked and cut most of their festival purses ; and had not the old man come in with a whoo-bub against his daughter and the king's son , and scared my choughs from the chaff , I had not left a purse alive in the whole army .


Nay , but my letters , by this means being there 
So soon as you arrive , shall clear that doubt .

And those that you'll procure from King Leontes 

Shall satisfy your father .

Happy be you !
All that you speak shows fair .

Whom have we here ?
We'll make an instrument of this : omit 
Nothing may give us aid .

If they have overheard me now , why , hanging .

How now , good fellow ! Why shakest thou so ? Fear not , man ; here's no harm intended to thee .

I am a poor fellow , sir .

Why , be so still ; here's nobody will steal that from thee ; yet , for the outside of thy poverty we must make an exchange ; therefore , discase thee instantly ,thou must think , there's a necessity in't ,and change garments with this gentleman : though the pennyworth on his side be the worst , yet hold thee , there's some boot .

I am a poor fellow , sir .

I know ye well enough .

Nay , prithee , dispatch : the gentleman is half flayed already .

Are you in earnest , sir ?

I smell the trick on't .

Dispatch , I prithee .

Indeed , I have had earnest ; but I cannot with conscience take it .

Unbuckle , unbuckle .

Fortunate mistress ,let my prophecy 
Come home to ye !you must retire yourself 
Into some covert : take your sweetheart's hat 
And pluck it o'er your brows ; muffle your face ;
Dismantle you , and , as you can , disliken 
The truth of your own seeming ; that you may ,
For I do fear eyes over you ,to shipboard 
Get undescried .

I see the play so lies 
That I must bear a part .

No remedy .
Have you done there ?

Should I now meet my father 
He would not call me son .

Nay , you shall have no hat .

Come , lady , come . Farewell , my friend .

Adieu , sir .

O Perdita , what have we twain forgot !
Pray you , a word .


What I do next shall be to tell the king 
Of this escape , and whither they are bound ;
Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail 
To force him after : in whose company 
I shall review Sicilia , for whose sight 
I have a woman's longing .

Fortune speed us !
Thus we set on , Camillo , to the sea-side .

The swifter speed the better .


I understand the business ; I hear it . To have an open ear , a quick eye , and a nimble hand , is necessary for a cut-purse : a good nose is requisite also , to smell out work for the other senses . I see this is the time that the unjust man doth thrive . What an exchange had this been without boot ! what a boot is here with this exchange ! Sure , the gods do this year connive at us , and we may do anything extempore . The prince himself is about a piece of iniquity ; stealing away from his father with his clog at his heels . If I thought it were a piece of honesty to acquaint the king withal , I would not do't : I hold it the more knavery to conceal it , and therein am I constant to my profession . Aside , aside : here is more matter for a hot brain . Every lane's end , every shop , church , session , hanging , yields a careful man work .


See , see , what a man you are now ! There is no other way but to tell the king she's a changeling and none of your flesh and blood .

Nay , but hear me .

Nay , but hear me .

Go to , then .

She being none of your flesh and blood , your flesh and blood has not offended the king ; and so your flesh and blood is not to be punished by him . Show those things you found about her ; those secret things , all but what she has with her : this being done , let the law go whistle : I warrant you .

I will tell the king all , every word , yea , and his son's pranks too ; who , I may say , is no honest man neither to his father nor to me , to go about to make me the king's brother-in-law .

Indeed , brother-in-law was the furthest off you could have been to him , and then your blood had been the dearer by I know not how much an ounce .

Very wisely , puppies !

Well , let us to the king : there is that in this fardel will make him scratch his beard .

I know not what impediment this complaint may be to the flight of my master .

Pray heartily he be at palace .

Though I am not naturally honest , I am so sometimes by chance : let me pocket up my pedlar's excrement . [Takes off his false beard .] How now , rustics ! whither are you bound ?

To the palace , an it like your worship .

Your affairs there , what , with whom , the condition of that fardel , the place of your dwelling , your names , your ages , of what having , breeding , and anything that is fitting to be known , discover .

We are but plain fellows , sir .

A lie ; you are rough and hairy . Let me have no lying ; it becomes none but tradesmen , and they often give us soldiers the lie ; but we pay them for it with stamped coin , not stabbing steel ; therefore they do not give us the lie .

Your worship had like to have given us one , if you had not taken yourself with the manner .

Are you a courtier , an't like you , sir ?

Whether it like me or no , I am a courtier . Seest thou not the air of the court in these enfoldings ? hath not my gait in it the measure of the court ? receives not thy nose court-odour from me ? reflect I not on thy baseness court-contempt ? Think'st thou , for that I insinuate , or toaze from thee thy business , I am therefore no courtier ? I am courtier , cap-a-pe , and one that will either push on or pluck back thy business there : whereupon I command thee to open thy affair .

My business , sir , is to the king .

What advocate hast thou to him ?

I know not , an't like you .

Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant : say you have none .

None , sir ; I have no pheasant , cock nor hen .

How bless'd are we that are not simple men !
Yet nature might have made me as these are ,
Therefore I'll not disdain .

This cannot be but a great courtier .

His garments are rich , but he wears them not handsomely .

He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical : a great man , I'll warrant ; I know by the picking on's teeth .

The fardel there ? what's i' the fardel ?
Wherefore that box ?

Sir , there lies such secrets in this fardel and box which none must know but the king ; and which he shall know within this hour if I may come to the speech of him .

Age , thou hast lost thy labour .

Why , sir ?

The king is not at the palace ; he is gone aboard a new ship to purge melancholy and air himself : for , if thou be'st capable of things serious , thou must know the king is full of grief .

So 'tis said , sir , about his son , that should have married a shepherd's daughter .

If that shepherd be not now in hand-fast , let him fly : the curses he shall have , the torture he shall feel , will break the back of man , the heart of monster .

Think you so , sir ?

Not he alone shall suffer what wit can make heavy and vengeance bitter ; but those that are germane to him , though removed fifty times , shall all come under the hangman : which though it be great pity , yet it is necessary . An old sheep-whistling rogue , a ram-tender , to offer to have his daughter come into grace ! Some say he shall be stoned ; but that death is too soft for him , say I : draw our throne into a sheep cote ! all deaths are too few , the sharpest too easy .

Has the old man e'er a son , sir , do you hear , an't like you , sir ?

He has a son , who shall be flayed alive ; then 'nointed over with honey , set on the head of a wasp's nest ; then stand till he be three quarters and a dram dead ; then recovered again with aqua-vit  or some other hot infusion ; then , raw as he is , and in the hottest day prognostication proclaims , shall he be set against a brick-wall , the sun looking with a southward eye upon him , where he is to behold him with flies blown to death . But what talk we of these traitorly rascals , whose miseries are to be smiled at , their offences being so capital ? Tell me ,for you seem to be honest plain men ,what you have to the king : being something gently considered , I'll bring you where he is aboard , tender your persons to his presence , whisper him in your behalfs ; and if it be in man besides the king to effect your suits , here is a man shall do it .

He seems to be of great authority : close with him , give him gold ; and though authority be a stubborn bear , yet he is oft led by the nose with gold . Show the inside of your purse to the outside of his hand , and no more ado . Remember , 'stoned ,' and 'flayed alive !' 

An't please you , sir , to undertake the business for us , here is that gold I have : I'll make it as much more and leave this young man in pawn till I bring it you .

After I have done what I promised ?

Ay , sir .

Well , give me the moiety . Are you a party in this business ?

In some sort , sir : but though my case be a pitiful one , I hope I shall not be flayed out of it .

O ! that's the case of the shepherd's son : hang him , he'll be made an example .

Comfort , good comfort ! we must to the king and show our strange sights : he must know 'tis none of your daughter nor my sister ; we are gone else . Sir , I will give you as much as this old man does when the business is performed ; and remain , as he says , your pawn till it be brought you .

I will trust you . Walk before toward the sea-side ; go on the right hand , I will but look upon the hedge and follow you .

We are blessed in this man , as I may say , even blessed .

Let's before as he bids us . He was provided to do us good .


If I had a mind to be honest I see Fortune would not suffer me : she drops booties in my mouth . I am courted now with a double occasion , gold , and a means to do the prince my master good ; which who knows how that may turn back to my advancement ? I will bring these two moles , these blind ones , aboard him : if he think it fit to shore them again , and that the complaint they have to the king concerns him nothing , let him call me rogue for being so far officious ; for I am proof against that title and what shame else belongs to't . To him will I present them : there may be matter in it .

Sir , you have done enough , and have perform'd 
A saint-like sorrow : no fault could you make 
Which you have not redeem'd ; indeed , paid down 
More penitence than done trespass . At the last ,
Do as the heavens have done , forget your evil ;
With them forgive yourself .

Whilst I remember 
Her and her virtues , I cannot forget 
My blemishes in them , and so still think of 
The wrong I did myself ; which was so much ,
That heirless it hath made my kingdom , and 
Destroy'd the sweet'st companion that e'er man 
Bred his hopes out of .

True , too true , my lord ;
If one by one you wedded all the world ,
Or from the all that are took something good ,
To make a perfect woman , she you kill'd 
Would be unparallel'd .

I think so . Kill'd !
She I kill'd ! I did so ; but thou strik'st me 
Sorely to say I did : it is as bitter 
Upon thy tongue as in my thought . Now , good now 
Say so but seldom .

Not at all , good lady :
You might have spoken a thousand things that would 
Have done the time more benefit , and grac'd 
Your kindness better .

You are one of those 
Would have him wed again .

If you would not so ,
You pity not the state , nor the remembrance 
Of his most sovereign name ; consider little 
What dangers , by his highness' fail of issue ,
May drop upon his kingdom and devour 
Incertain lookers-on . What were more holy 
Than to rejoice the former queen is well ?
What holier than for royalty's repair ,
For present comfort , and for future good ,
To bless the bed of majesty again 
With a sweet fellow to't ?

There is none worthy ,
Respecting her that's gone . Besides , the gods 
Will have fulfill'd their secret purposes ;
For has not the divine Apollo said ,
Is't not the tenour of his oracle ,
That King Leontes shall not have an heir 
Till his lost child be found ? which that it shall ,
Is all as monstrous to our human reason 
As my Antigonus to break his grave 
And come again to me ; who , on my life ,
Did perish with the infant . 'Tis your counsel 
My lord should to the heavens be contrary ,
Oppose against their wills .

Care not for issue ;
The crown will find an heir : great Alexander 
Left his to the worthiest , so his successor 
Was like to be the best .

Good Paulina ,
Who hast the memory of Hermione ,
I know , in honour ; O ! that ever I 
Had squar'd me to thy counsel ! then , even now ,
I might have look'd upon my queen's full eyes ,
Have taken treasure from her lips ,

And left them 
More rich , for what they yielded .

Thou speak'st truth .
No more such wives ; therefore , no wife : one worse ,
And better us'd , would make her sainted spirit 
Again possess her corpse and on this stage ,
Where we're offenders now ,appear soul-vex'd ,
And begin , 'Why to me ?' 

Had she such power ,
She had just cause .

She had ; and would incense me 
To murder her I married .

I should so :
Were I the ghost that walk'd , I'd bid you mark 
Her eye , and tell me for what dull part in't 
You chose her ; then I'd shriek , that even your ears 
Should rift to hear me ; and the words that follow'd 
Should be 'Remember mine .' 

Stars , stars !
And all eyes else dead coals . Fear thou no wife ;
I'll have no wife , Paulina .

Will you swear 
Never to marry but by my free leave ?

Never , Paulina : so be bless'd my spirit !

Then , good my lords , bear witness to his oath .

You tempt him over much .

Unless another ,
As like Hermione as is her picture ,
Affront his eye .

Good madam ,

I have done .
Yet , if my lord will marry ,if you will , sir ,
No remedy , but you will ,give me the office 
To choose you a queen , she shall not be so young 
As was your former ; but she shall be such 
As , walk'd your first queen's ghost , it should take joy 
To see her in your arms .

My true Paulina ,
We shall not marry till thou bidd'st us .

That 
Shall be when your first queen's again in breath ;
Never till then .


One that gives out himself Prince Florizel ,
Son of Polixenes , with his princess ,she 
The fairest I have yet beheld ,desires access 
To your high presence .

What with him ? he comes not 
Like to his father's greatness ; his approach ,
So out of circumstance and sudden , tells us 
'Tis not a visitation fram'd , but forc'd 
By need and accident . What train ?

But few ,
And those but mean .

His princess , say you , with him ?

Ay , the most peerless piece of earth , I think ,
That e'er the sun shone bright on .

O Hermione !
As every present time doth boast itself 
Above a better gone , so must thy grave 
Give way to what's seen now . Sir , you yourself 
Have said and writ so ,but your writing now 
Is colder than that theme ,'She had not been ,
Nor was not to be equall'd ;' thus your verse 
Flow'd with her beauty once : 'tis shrewdly ebb'd 
To say you have seen a better .

Pardon , madam :
The one I have almost forgot your pardon 
The other , when she has obtain'd your eye ,
Will have your tongue too . This is a creature ,
Would she begin a sect , might quench the zeal 
Of all professors else , make proselytes 
Of who she but bid follow .

How ! not women ?

Women will love her , that she is a woman 
More worth than any man ; men , that she is 
The rarest of all women .

Go , Cleomenes ;
Yourself , assisted with your honour'd friends ,
Bring them to our embracement . Still 'tis strange ,

He thus should steal upon us .

Had our prince 
Jewel of children seen this hour , he had pair'd 
Well with this lord : there was not full a month 
Between their births .

Prithee , no more : cease ! thou know'st 
He dies to me again when talk'd of : sure ,
When I shall see this gentleman , thy speeches 
Will bring me to consider that which may 
Unfurnish me of reason . They are come .


Your mother was most true to wedlock , prince ;
For she did print your royal father off ,
Conceiving you . Were I but twenty-one ,
Your father's image is so hit in you ,
His very air , that I should call you brother ,
As I did him ; and speak of something wildly 
By us perform'd before . Most dearly welcome !
And you , fair princess ,goddess ! O , alas !
I lost a couple , that 'twixt heaven and earth 
Might thus have stood begetting wonder as 
You , gracious couple , do : and then I lost 
All mine own folly the society ,
Amity too , of your brave father , whom ,
Though bearing misery , I desire my life 

Once more to look on him .

By his command 
Have I here touch'd Sicilia ; and from him 
Give you all greetings that a king , at friend ,
Can send his brother : and , but infirmity ,
Which waits upon worn times ,hath something seiz'd 
His wish'd ability , he had himself 
The land and waters 'twixt your throne and his 
Measur'd to look upon you , whom he loves 
He bade me say so more than all the sceptres 
And those that bear them living .

O , my brother !
Good gentleman ,the wrongs I have done thee stir 
Afresh within me , and these thy offices 
So rarely kind , are as interpreters 
Of my behind-hand slackness ! Welcome hither ,
As is the spring to the earth . And hath he too 
Expos'd this paragon to the fearful usage 
At least ungentle of the dreadful Neptune ,
To greet a man not worth her pains , much less 
The adventure of her person ?

Good my lord ,
She came from Libya .

Where the war-like Smalus ,
That noble honour'd lord , is fear'd and lov'd ?

Most royal sir , from thence ; from him , whose daughter 
His tears proclaim'd his , parting with her : thence 
A prosperous south-wind friendly we have cross'd ,
To execute the charge my father gave me 
For visiting your highness : my best train 
I have from your Sicilian shores dismiss'd ;
Who for Bohemia bend , to signify 
Not only my success in Libya , sir ,
But my arrival and my wife's , in safety 
Here where we are .

The blessed gods 
Purge all infection from our air whilst you 
Do climate here ! You have a holy father ,
A graceful gentleman ; against whose person ,
So sacred as it is , I have done sin :
For which the heavens , taking angry note ,
Have left me issueless ; and your father's bless'd 
As he from heaven merits it with you ,
Worthy his goodness . What might I have been ,
Might I a son and daughter now have look'd on ,
Such goodly things as you !


Most noble sir ,
That which I shall report will bear no credit ,
Were not the proof so nigh . Please you , great sir ,
Bohemia greets you from himself by me ;
Desires you to attach his son , who has 
His dignity and duty both cast off 
Fled from his father , from his hopes , and with 
A shepherd's daughter .

Where's Bohemia ? speak .

Here in your city ; I now came from him :
I speak amazedly , and it becomes 
My marvel and my message . To your court 
Whiles he was hastening ,in the chase it seems 
Of this fair couple ,meets he on the way 
The father of this seeming lady and 
Her brother , having both their country quitted 
With this young prince .

Camillo has betray'd me ;
Whose honour and whose honesty till now 
Endur'd all weathers .

Lay't so to his charge :
He's with the king your father .

Who ? Camillo ?

Camillo , sir : I spake with him , who now 
Has these poor men in question . Never saw I 
Wretches so quake : they kneel , they kiss the earth ,
Forswear themselves as often as they speak :
Bohemia stops his ears , and threatens them 
With divers deaths in death .

O my poor father !
The heaven sets spies upon us , will not have 
Our contract celebrated .

You are married ?

We are not , sir , nor are we like to be ;
The stars , I see , will kiss the valleys first :
The odds for high and low's alike .

My lord ,
Is this the daughter of a king ?

She is ,
When once she is my wife .

That 'once ,' I see , by your good father's speed ,
Will come on very slowly . I am sorry ,
Most sorry , you have broken from his liking 
Where you were tied in duty ; and as sorry 
Your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty ,
That you might well enjoy her .

Dear , look up :
Though Fortune , visible an enemy ,
Should chase us with my father , power no jot 
Hath she to change our loves . Beseech you , sir ,
Remember since you ow'd no more to time 
Than I do now ; with thought of such affections ,
Step forth mine advocate ; at your request 
My father will grant precious things as trifles 

Would he do so , I'd beg your precious mistress ,
Which he counts but a trifle .

Sir , my liege ,
Your eye hath too much youth in't : not a month 
'Fore your queen died , she was more worth such gazes 
Than what you look on now .

I thought of her ,
Even in these looks I made .

But your petition 
Is yet unanswer'd . I will to your father :
Your honour not o'erthrown by your desires ,
I am friend to them and you ; upon which errand 
I now go toward him . Therefore follow me ,
And mark what way I make : come , good my lord .


Beseech you , sir , were you present at this relation ?

I was by at the opening of the fardel , heard the old shepherd deliver the manner how he found it : whereupon , after a little amazedness , we were all commanded out of the chamber ; only this methought I heard the shepherd say , he found the child .

I would most gladly know the issue of it .

I make a broken delivery of the business ; but the changes I perceived in the king and Camillo were very notes of admiration : they seemed almost , with staring on one another , to tear the cases of their eyes ; there was speech in their dumbness , language in their very gesture ; they looked as they had heard of a world ransomed , or one destroyed : a notable passion of wonder appeared in them ; but the wisest beholder , that knew no more but seeing , could not say if the importance were joy or sorrow ; but in the extremity of the one it must needs be .

Here comes a gentleman that haply knows more . The news , Rogero ?

Nothing but bonfires : the oracle is fulfilled ; the king's daughter is found : such a deal of wonder is broken out within this hour that ballad-makers cannot be able to express it .

Here comes the lady Paulina's steward : he can deliver you more . How goes it now , sir ? this news which is called true is so like an old tale , that the verity of it is in strong suspicion : has the king found his heir ?

Most true , if ever truth were pregnant by circumstance : that which you hear you'll swear you see , there is such unity in the proofs . The mantle of Queen Hermione , her jewel about the neck of it , the letters of Antigonus found with it , which they know to be his character ; the majesty of the creature in resemblance of the mother , the affection of nobleness which nature shows above her breeding , and many other evidences proclaim her with all certainty to be the king's daughter . Did you see the meeting of the two kings ?

No .

Then have you lost a sight , which was to be seen , cannot be spoken of . There might you have beheld one joy crown another , so , and in such manner that , it seemed , sorrow wept to take leave of them , for their joy waded in tears . There was casting up of eyes , holding up of hands , with countenances of such distraction that they were to be known by garment , not by favour . Our king , being ready to leap out of himself for joy of his found daughter , as if that joy were now become a loss , cries , 'O , thy mother , thy mother !' then asks Bohemia forgiveness ; then embraces his son-in-law ; then again worries he his daughter with clipping her ; now he thanks the old shepherd , which stands by like a weather-bitten conduit of many kings' reigns . I never heard of such another encounter , which lames report to follow it and undoes description to do it .

What , pray you , became of Antigonus that carried hence the child ?

Like an old tale still , which will have matter to rehearse , though credit be asleep and not an ear open . He was torn to pieces with a bear : this avouches the shepherd's son , who has not only his innocence which seems much to justify him , but a handkerchief and rings of his that Paulina knows .

What became of his bark and his followers ?

Wracked , the same instant of their master's death , and in the view of the shepherd : so that all the instruments which aided to expose the child were even then lost when it was found . But , O ! the noble combat that 'twixt joy and sorrow was fought in Paulina . She had one eye declined for the loss of her husband , another elevated that the oracle was fulfilled : she lifted the princess from the earth , and so locks her in embracing , as if she would pin her to her heart that she might no more be in danger of losing .

The dignity of this act was worth the audience of kings and princes , for by such was it acted .

One of the prettiest touches of all , and that which angled for mine eyes ,caught the water though not the fish ,was when at the relation of the queen's death , with the manner how she came to it ,bravely confessed and lamented by the king ,how attentiveness wounded his daughter ; till , from one sign of dolour to another , she did , with an 'alas !' I would fain say , bleed tears , for I am sure my heart wept blood . Who was most marble there changed colour ; some swounded , all sorrowed : if all the world could have seen't , the woe had been universal .

Are they returned to the court ?

No ; the princess hearing of her mother's statue , which is in the keeping of Paulina a piece many years in doing , and now newly performed by that rare Italian master , Julio Romano ; who , had he himself eternity and could put breath into his work , would beguile Nature of her custom , so perfectly he is her ape : he so near to Hermione hath done Hermione that they say one would speak to her and stand in hope of answer : thither with all greediness of affection are they gone , and there they intend to sup .

I thought she had some great matter there in hand , for she hath privately , twice or thrice a day , ever since the death of Hermione , visited that removed house . Shall we thither and with our company piece the rejoicing ?

Who would be thence that has the benefit of access ? every wink of an eye some new grace will be born : our absence makes us unthrifty to our knowledge . Let's along .


Now , had I not the dash of my former life in me , would preferment drop on my head . I brought the old man and his son aboard the prince ; told him I heard them talk of a fardel and I know not what ; but he at that time , overfond of the shepherd's daughter ,so he then took her to be ,who began to be much sea-sick , and himself little better , extremity of weather continuing , this mystery remained undiscovered . But 'tis all one to me ; for had I been the finder out of this secret , it would not have relished among my other discredits . Here come those I have done good to against my will , and already appearing in the blossoms of their fortune .


Come , boy ; I am past moe children , but thy sons and daughters will be all gentlemen born .

You are well met , sir . You denied to fight with me this other day , because I was no gentleman born : see you these clothes ? say , you see them not and think me still no gentleman born : you were best say these robes are not gentleman born . Give me the lie , do , and try whether I am not now gentleman born .

I know you are now , sir , a gentleman born .

Ay , and have been so any time these four hours .

And so have I , boy .

So you have : but I was a gentleman born before my father ; for the king's son took me by the hand and called me brother ; and then the two kings called my father brother ; and then the prince my brother and the princess my sister called my father father ; and so we wept : and there was the first gentleman-like tears that ever we shed .

We may live , son , to shed many more .

Ay ; or else 'twere hard luck , being in so preposterous estate as we are .

I humbly beseech you , sir , to pardon me all the faults I have committed to your worship , and to give me your good report to the prince my master .

Prithee , son , do ; for we must be gentle , now we are gentlemen .

Thou wilt amend thy life ?

Ay , an it like your good worship .

Give me thy hand : I will swear to the prince thou art as honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia .

You may say it , but not swear it .

Not swear it , now I am a gentleman ? Let boors and franklins say it , I'll swear it .

How if it be false , son ?

If it be ne'er so false , a true gentleman may swear it in the behalf of his friend : and I'll swear to the prince thou art a tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt not be drunk ; but I know thou art no tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be drunk : but I'll swear it , and I would thou wouldst be a tall fellow of thy hands .

I will prove so , sir , to my power .

Ay , by any means prove a tall fellow : if I do not wonder how thou darest venture to be drunk , not being a tall fellow , trust me not . Hark ! the kings and the princes , our kindred , are going to see the queen's picture . Come , follow us : we'll be thy good masters .


O grave and good Paulina , the great comfort 
That I have had of thee !

What , sovereign sir ,
I did not well , I meant well . All my services 
You have paid home ; but that you have vouchsaf'd ,
With your crown'd brother and these your contracted 
Heirs of your kingdoms , my poor house to visit ,
It is a surplus of your grace , which never 
My life may last to answer .

O Paulina !
We honour you with trouble : but we came 
To see the statue of our queen : your gallery 
Have we pass'd through , not without much content 
In many singularities , but we saw not 
That which my daughter came to look upon ,
The statue of her mother .

As she liv'd peerless ,
So her dead likeness , I do well believe ,
Excels whatever yet you look'd upon 
Or hand of man hath done ; therefore I keep it 
Lonely , apart . But here it is : prepare 
To see the life as lively mock'd as ever 
Still sleep mock'd death : behold ! and say 'tis well .

I like your silence : it the more shows off 
Your wonder ; but yet speak : first you , my liege .
Comes it not something near ?

Her natural posture !
Chide me , dear stone , that I may say , indeed 
Thou art Hermione ; or rather , thou art she 
In thy not chiding , for she was as tender 
As infancy and grace . But yet , Paulina ,
Hermione was not so much wrinkled ; nothing 
So aged as this seems .

O ! not by much .

So much the more our carver's excellence ;
Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her 
As she liv'd now .

As now she might have done ,
So much to my good comfort , as it is 
Now piercing to my soul . O ! thus she stood ,
Even with such life of majesty ,warm life ,
As now it coldly stands ,when first I woo'd her .
I am asham'd : does not the stone rebuke me 
For being more stone than it ? O , royal piece !
There's magic in thy majesty , which has 
My evils conjur'd to remembrance , and 
From thy admiring daughter took the spirits ,
Standing like stone with thee .

And give me leave ,
And do not say 'tis superstition , that 
I kneel and then implore her blessing . Lady ,
Dear queen , that ended when I but began ,
Give me that hand of yours to kiss .

O , patience !
The statue is but newly fix'd , the colour's 
Not dry .

My lord , your sorrow was too sore laid on ,
Which sixteen winters cannot blow away ,
So many summers dry : scarce any joy 
Did ever so long live ; no sorrow 
But kill'd itself much sooner .

Dear my brother ,
Let him that was the cause of this have power 
To take off so much grief from you as he 
Will piece up in himself .

Indeed , my lord ,
If I had thought the sight of my poor image 
Would thus have wrought you ,for the stone is mine ,
I'd not have show'd it .

Do not draw the curtain .

No longer shall you gaze on't , lest your fancy 
May think anon it moves .

Let be , let be !
Would I were dead , but that , methinks , already 
What was he that did make it ? See , my lord ,
Would you not deem it breath'd , and that those veins 
Did verily bear blood ?

Masterly done :
The very life seems warm upon her lip .

The fixure of her eye has motion in't ,
As we are mock'd with art .

I'll draw the curtain ;
My lord's almost so far transported that 
He'll think anon it lives .

O sweet Paulina !
Make me to think so twenty years together :
No settled senses of the world can match 
The pleasure of that madness . Let't alone .

I am sorry , sir , I have thus far stirr'd you : but 
I could afflict you further .

Do , Paulina ;
For this affliction has a taste as sweet 
As any cordial comfort . Still , methinks ,
There is an air comes from her : what fine chisel 
Could ever yet cut breath ? Let no man mock me ,
For I will kiss her .

Good my lord , forbear .
The ruddiness upon her lip is wet :
You'll mar it if you kiss it ; stain your own 
With oily painting . Shall I draw the curtain ?

No , not these twenty years .

So long could I 
Stand by , a looker-on .

Either forbear ,
Quit presently the chapel , or resolve you 
For more amazement . If you can behold it ,
I'll make the statue move indeed , descend ,
And take you by the hand ; but then you'll think ,
Which I protest against ,I am assisted 
By wicked powers .

What you can make her do ,
I am content to look on : what to speak ,
I am content to hear ; for 'tis as easy 
To make her speak as move .

It is requir'd 
You do awake your faith . Then , all stand still ;
Or those that think it is unlawful business 
I am about , let them depart .

Proceed :
No foot shall stir .

Music , awake her : strike !

'Tis time ; descend ; be stone no more : approach ;
Strike all that look upon with marvel . Come ;
I'll fill your grave up : stir ; nay , come away ;
Bequeath to death your numbness , for from him 
Dear life redeems you . You perceive she stirs :

Start not ; her actions shall be holy as 
You hear my spell is lawful : do not shun her 
Until you see her die again , for then 
You kill her double . Nay , present your hand :
When she was young you woo'd her ; now in age 
Is she become the suitor !

O ! she's warm .
If this be magic , let it be an art 
Lawful as eating .

She embraces him .

She hangs about his neck :
If she pertain to life let her speak too .

Ay ; and make't manifest where she has liv'd ,
Or how stol'n from the dead .

That she is living ,
Were it but told you , should be hooted at 
Like an old tale ; but it appears she lives ,
Though yet she speak not . Mark a little while .
Please you to interpose , fair madam . kneel 
And pray your mother's blessing . Turn , good lady ;
Our Perdita is found .


You gods , look down ,
And from your sacred vials pour your graces 
Upon my daughter's head ! Tell me , mine own ,
Where hast thou been preserv'd ? where liv'd ? how found 
Thy father's court ? for thou shalt hear that I ,
Knowing by Paulina that the oracle 
Gave hope thou wast in being , have preserv'd 
Myself to see the issue .

There's time enough for that ;
Lest they desire upon this push to trouble 
Your joys with like relation . Go together ,
You precious winners all : your exultation 
Partake to every one . I , an old turtle ,
Will wing me to some wither'd bough , and there 
My mate , that's never to be found again ,
Lament till I am lost .

O ! peace , Paulina .
Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent ,
As I by thine a wife : this is a match ,
And made between's by vows . Thou hast found mine ;
But how , is to be question'd ; for I saw her ,
As I thought dead , and have in vain said many 
A prayer upon her grave . I'll not seek far ,
For him , I partly know his mind ,to find thee 
An honourable husband . Come , Camillo ,
And take her by the hand ; whose worth and honesty 
Is richly noted , and here justified 
By us , a pair of kings . Let's from this place .
What ! look upon my brother : both your pardons ,
That e'er I put between your holy looks 
My ill suspicion . This' your son-in-law ,
And son unto the king ,whom heavens directing ,
Is troth-plight to your daughter . Good Paulina ,
Lead us from hence , where we may leisurely 
Each one demand and answer to his part 
Perform'd in this wide gap of time since first 
We were dissever'd : hastily lead away .

TROILUS AND CRESSIDA

In Troy there lies the scene . From isles of Greece 
The princes orgulous , their high blood chaf'd ,
Have to the port of Athens sent their ships ,
Fraught with the ministers and instruments 
Of cruel war : sixty and nine , that wore 
Their crownets regal , from the Athenian bay 
Put forth toward Phrygia ; and their vow is made 
To ransack Troy , within whose strong immures 
The ravish'd Helen , Menelaus' queen ,
With wanton Paris sleeps ; and that's the quarrel .
To Tenedos they come ,
And the deep-drawing barks do there disgorge 
Their war-like fraughtage : now on Dardan plains 
The fresh and yet unbruised Greeks do pitch 
Their brave pavilions : Priam's six-gated city ,
Dardan , and Tymbria , Ilias , Chetas , Trojan ,
And Antenorides , with massy staples 
And corresponsive and fulfilling bolts ,
Sperr up the sons of Troy .
Now expectation , tickling skittish spirits ,
On one and other side , Trojan and Greek ,
Sets all on hazard . And hither am I come 
A prologue arm'd , but not in confidence 
Of author's pen or actor's voice , but suited 
In like conditions as our argument ,
To tell you , fair beholders , that our play 
Leaps o'er the vaunt and firstlings of those broils ,
Beginning in the middle ; starting thence away 
To what may be digested in a play .
Like or find fault ; do as your pleasures are :
Now good or bad , 'tis but the chance of war .

Call here my varlet , I'll unarm again :
Why should I war without the walls of Troy ,
That find such cruel battle here within ?
Each Trojan that is master of his heart ,
Let him to field ; Troilus , alas ! has none .

Will this gear ne'er be mended ?

The Greeks are strong , and skilful to their strength .
Fierce to their skill , and to their fierceness valiant ;
But I am weaker than a woman's tear ,
Tamer than sleep , fonder than ignorance ,
Less valiant than the virgin in the night ,
And skilless as unpractis'd infancy .

Well , I have told you enough of this : for my part , I'll not meddle nor make no further . He that will have a cake out of the wheat must tarry the grinding .

Have I not tarried ?

Ay , the grinding ; but you must tarry the bolting .

Have I not tarried ?

Ay , the bolting ; but you must tarry the leavening .

Still have I tarried .

Ay , to the leavening ; but here's yet in the word 'hereafter' the kneading , the making of the cake , the heating of the oven , and the baking ; nay , you must stay the cooling too , or you may chance to burn your lips .

Patience herself , what goddess e'er she be ,
Doth lesser blench at sufferance than I do .
At Priam's royal table do I sit ;
And when fair Cressid comes into my thoughts ,
So , traitor ! 'when she comes' !When is she thence ?

Well , she looked yesternight fairer than ever I saw her look , or any woman else .

I was about to tell thee : when my heart ,
As wedged with a sigh , would rive in twain ,
Lest Hector or my father should perceive me ,
I have as when the sun doth light a storm 
Buried this sigh in wrinkle of a smile ;
But sorrow , that is couch'd in seeming gladness ,
Is like that mirth fate turns to sudden sadness .

An her hair were not somewhat darker than Helen's ,well , go to ,there were no more comparison between the women : but , for my part , she is my kins woman ; I would not , as they term it , praise her , but I would somebody had heard her talk yesterday , as I did : I will not dispraise your sister Cassandra's wit , but 

O Pandarus ! I tell thee , Pandarus ,
When I do tell thee , there my hopes lie drown'd ,
Reply not in how many fathoms deep 
They lie indrench'd . I tell thee I am mad 
In Cressid's love : thou answer'st , she is fair ;
Pour'st in the open ulcer of my heart 
Her eyes , her hair , her cheek , her gait , her voice ;
Handlest in thy discourse , O ! that her hand ,
In whose comparison all whites are ink ,
Writing their own reproach ; to whose soft seizure 
The cygnet's down is harsh , and spirit of sense 
Hard as the palm of ploughman : this thou tell'st me ,
As true thou tell'st me , when I say I love her ;
But , saying thus , instead of oil and balm ,
Thou lay'st in every gash that love hath given me 
The knife that made it .

I speak no more than truth .

Thou dost not speak so much .

Faith , I'll not meddle in't . Let her be as she is : if she be fair , 'tis the better for her ; an she be not , she has the mends in her own hands .

Good Pandarus , how now , Pandarus !

I have had my labour for my travail ; ill-thought on of her , and ill-thought on of you : gone between , and between , but small thanks for my labour .

What ! art thou angry , Pandarus ? what ! with me ?

Because she's kin to me , therefore she's not so fair as Helen : an she were not kin to me , she would be as fair on Friday as Helen is on Sunday . But what care I ? I care not an she were a black-a-moor ; 'tis all one to me .

Say I she is not fair ?

I do not care whether you do or no . She's a fool to stay behind her father : let her to the Greeks ; and so I'll tell her the next time I see her . For my part , I'll meddle nor make no more i' the matter .

Pandarus ,

Not I .

Sweet Pandarus ,

Pray you , speak no more to me ! I will leave all as I found it , and there an end .


Peace , you ungracious clamours ! peace , rude sounds !
Fools on both sides ! Helen must needs bo fair ,
When with your blood you daily paint her thus .
I cannot fight upon this argument ;
It is too starv'd a subject for my sword .
But Pandarus ,O gods ! how do you plague me .
I cannot come to Cressid but by Pandar ;
And he's as tetchy to be woo'd to woo 
As she is stubborn-chaste against all suit .
Tell me , Apollo , for thy Daphne's love ,
What Cressid is , what Pandar , and what we ?
Her bed is India ; there she lies , a pearl :
Between our Ilium and where she resides 
Let it be call'd the wild and wandering flood ;
Ourself the merchant , and this sailing Pandar 
Our doubtful hope , our convoy and our bark .


How now , Prince Troilus ! wherefore not afield ?

Because not there : this woman's answer sorts ,
For womanish it is to be from thence .
What news ,  neas , from the field to-day ?

That Paris is returned home , and hurt .

By whom ,  neas ?

Troilus , by Menelaus .

Let Paris bleed : 'tis but a scar to scorn ;
Paris is gor'd with Menelaus' horn .


Hark , what good sport is out of town to-day !

Better at home , if 'would I might' were 'may .' 
But to the sport abroad : are you bound thither ?

In all swift haste .

Come , go we then together .


Who were those went by ?

Queen Hecuba and Helen .

And whither go they ?

Up to the eastern tower ,
Whose height commands as subject all the vale ,
To see the battle . Hector , whose patience 
Is as a virtue fix'd , to-day was mov'd :
He chid Andromache , and struck his armourer ;
And , like as there were husbandry in war ,
Before the sun rose he was harness'd light ,
And to the field goes he ; where every flower 
Did , as a prophet , weep what it foresaw 
In Hector's wrath .

What was his cause of anger ?

The noise goes , this : there is among the Greeks 
A lord of Trojan blood , nephew to Hector ;
They call him Ajax .

Good ; and what of him ?

They say he is a very man per se 
And stands alone .

So do all men , unless they are drunk , sick , or have no legs .

This man , lady , hath robbed many beasts of their particular additions : he is as valiant as the lion , churlish as the bear , slow as the elephant : a man into whom nature hath so crowded humours that his valour is crushed into folly , his folly sauced with discretion : there is no man hath a virtue that he hath not a glimpse of , nor any man an attaint but he carries some stain of it . He is melancholy without cause , and merry against the hair ; he hath the joints of every thing , but every thing so out of joint that he is a gouty Briareus , many hands and no use ; or purblind Argus , all eyes and no sight .

But how should this man , that makes me smile , make Hector angry ?

They say he yesterday coped Hector in the battle and struck him down ; the disdain and shame whereof hath ever since kept Hector fasting and waking .

Who comes here ?


Madam , your uncle Pandarus .

Hector's a gallant man .

As may be in the world , lady .

What's that ? what's that ?

Good morrow , uncle Pandarus .

Good morrow , cousin Cressid . What do you talk of ? Good morrow , Alexander .
How do you , cousin ? When were you at Ilium ?

This morning , uncle .

What were you talking of when I came ? Was Hector armed and gone ere ye came to Ilium ? Helen was not up , was she ?

Hector was gone , but Helen was not up .

E'en so : Hector was stirring early .

That were we talking of , and of his anger .

Was he angry ?

So he says here .

True , he was so ; I know the cause too : he'll lay about him to-day , I can tell them that : and there's Troilus will not come far behind him ; let them take heed of Troilus , I can tell them that too .

What ! is he angry too ?

Who , Troilus ? Troilus is the better man of the two .

O Jupiter ! there's no comparison .

What ! not between Troilus and Hector ?
Do you know a man if you see him ?

Ay , if I ever saw him before and knew him .

Well , I say Troilus is Troilus .

Then you say as I say ; for I am sure he is not Hector .

No , nor Hector is not Troilus in some degrees .

'Tis just to each of them ; he is himself .

Himself ! Alas , poor Troilus , I would he were .

So he is .

Condition , I had gone bare-foot to India .

He is not Hector .

Himself ! no , he's not himself . Would a' were himself : well , the gods are above ; time must friend or end : well , Troilus , well , I would my heart were in her body . No , Hector is not a better man than Troilus .

Excuse me .

He is elder .

Pardon me , pardon me .

Th' other's not come to't ; you shall tell me another tale when the other's come to't . Hector shall not have his wit this year .

He shall not need it if he have his own .

Nor his qualities .

No matter .

Nor his beauty .

'Twould not become him ; his own's better .

You have no judgment , niece : Helen herself swore th' other day , that Troilus , for a brown favour ,for so 'tis I must confess ,not brown neither ,

No , but brown .

Faith , to say truth , brown and not brown .

To say the truth , true and not true .

She prais'd his complexion above Paris .

Why , Paris hath colour enough .

So he has .

Then Troilus should have too much : if she praised him above , his complexion is higher than his : he having colour enough , and the other higher , is too flaming a praise for a good complexion . I had as lief Helen's golden tongue had commended Troilus for a copper nose .

I swear to you , I think Helen loves him better than Paris .

Then she's a merry Greek indeed .

Nay , I am sure she does . She came to him th' other day into the compassed window , and , you know , he has not past three or four hairs on his chin ,

Indeed , a tapster's arithmetic may soon bring his particulars therein to a total .

Why , he is very young ; and yet will he , within three pound , lift as much as his brother Hector .

Is he so young a man , and so old a lifter ?

But to prove to you that Helen loves him : she came and puts me her white hand to his cloven chin ,

Juno have mercy ! how came it cloven ?

Why , you know , 'tis dimpled . I think his smiling becomes him better than any man in all Phrygia .

O ! he smiles valiantly .

Does he not ?

O ! yes , an 'twere a cloud in autumn .

Why , go to , then . But to prove to you that Helen loves Troilus ,

Troilus will stand to the proof , if you'll prove it so .

Troilus ! why he esteems her no more than I esteem an addle egg .

If you love an addle egg as well as you love an idle head , you would eat chickens i' the shell .

I cannot choose but laugh , to think how she tickled his chin : indeed , she has a marvell's white hand , I must needs confess ,

Without the rack .

And she takes upon her to spy a white hair on his chin .

Alas ! poor chin ! many a wart is richer .

But there was such laughing : Queen Hecuba laughed that her eyes ran o'er .

With millstones .

And Cassandra laughed .

But there was more temperate fire under the pot of her eyes : did her eyes run o'er too ?

And Hector laughed .

At what was all this laughing ?

Marry , at the white hair that Helen spied on Troilus' chin .

An't had been a green hair , I should have laughed too .

They laughed not so much at the hair as at his pretty answer .

What was his answer ?

Quoth she , 'Here's but one-and-fifty hairs on your chin , and one of them is white .' 

This is her question .

That's true ; make no question of that . 'One-and-fifty hairs ,' quoth he , 'and one white : that white hair is my father , and all the rest are his sons .' 'Jupiter !' quoth she , 'which of these hairs is Paris , my husband ?' 'The forked one ,' quoth he ; 'pluck't out , and give it him .' But there was such laughing , and Helen so blushed , and Paris so chafed , and all the rest so laughed , that it passed .

So let it now , for it has been a great while going by .

Well , cousin , I told you a thing yesterday ; think on't .

So I do .

I'll be sworn 'tis true : he will weep you , an 'twere a man born in April .

And I'll spring up in his tears , an 'twere a nettle against May .


Hark ! they are coming from the field . Shall we stand up here , and see them as they pass toward Ilium ? good niece , do ; sweet niece , Cressida .

At your pleasure .

Here , here ; here's an excellent place : here we may see most bravely . I'll tell you them all by their names as they pass by , but mark Troilus above the rest .

Speak not so loud .


That's  neas : is not that a brave man ? he's one of the flowers of Troy , I can tell you : but mark Troilus ; you shall see anon .


Who's that ?

That's Antenor : he has a shrewd wit , I can tell you ; and he's a man good enough : he's one o' the soundest judgments in Troy , whosoever , and a proper man of person . When comes Troilus ? I'll show you Troilus anon : if he see me , you shall see him nod at me .

Will he give you the nod ?

You shall see .

If he do , the rich shall have more .


That's Hector , that , that , look you , that ; there's a fellow ! Go thy way , Hector ! There's a brave man , niece . O brave Hector ! Look how he looks ! there's a countenance ! Is't not a brave man ?

O ! a brave man .

Is a' not ? It does a man's heart good . Look you what hacks are on his helmet ! look you yonder , do you see ? look you there : there's no jesting ; there's laying on , take't off who will , as they say : there be hacks !

Be those with swords ?

Swords ? any thing , he cares not ; an the devil come to him , it's all one : by God's lid , it does one's heart good . Yonder comes Paris , yonder comes Paris .

Look ye yonder , niece : is't not a gallant man too , is't not ? Why , this is brave now . Who said he came hurt home to-day ? he's not hurt : why , this will do Helen's heart good now , ha ! Would I could see Troilus now ! You shall see Troilus anon .

Who's that ?


That's Helenus . I marvel where Troilus is . That's Helenus . I think he went not forth to-day . That's Helenus .

Can Helenus fight , uncle ?

Helenus ? no , yes , he'll fight indifferent well . I marvel where Troilus is . Hark ! do you not hear the people cry , 'Troilus ?' Helenus is a priest .

What sneaking fellow comes yonder ?


Where ? yonder ? that's Deiphobus .
Tis Troilus ! there's a man , niece ! Hem ! Brave 
Troilus ! the prince of chivalry !

Peace ! for shame , peace !

Mark him ; note him : O brave Troilus ! look well upon him , niece : look you how his sword is bloodied , and his helmet more hacked than Hector's ; and how he looks , and how he goes ! O admirable youth ! he ne'er saw three-and-twenty . Go thy way , Troilus , go thy way ! Had I a sister were a grace , or a daughter a goddess , he should take his choice . O admirable man ! Paris ? Paris is dirt to him ; and , I warrant , Helen , to change , would give an eye to boot .

Here come more .


Asses , fools , dolts ! chaff and bran , chaff and bran ! porridge after meat ! I could live and die i' the eyes of Troilus . Ne'er look , ne'er look ; the eagles are gone : crows and daws , crows and daws ! I had rather be such a man as Troilus than Agamemnon and all Greece .

There is among the Greeks Achilles , a better man than Troilus .

Achilles ! a drayman , a porter , a very camel .

Well , well .

'Well , well !' Why , have you any discretion ? have you any eyes ? Do you know what a man is ? Is not birth , beauty , good shape , discourse , manhood , learning , gentleness , virtue , youth , liberality , and so forth , the spice and salt that season a man ?

Ay , a minced man : and then to be baked with no date in the pie , for then the man's date's out .

You are such a woman ! one knows not at what ward you lie .

Upon my back , to defend my belly ; upon my wit , to defend my wiles ; upon my secrecy , to defend mine honesty ; my mask , to defend my beauty ; and you , to defend all these : and at all these wards I lie , at a thousand watches .

Say one of your watches .

Nay , I'll watch you for that ; and that's one of the chiefest of them too : if I cannot ward what I would not have hit , I can watch you for telling how I took the blow ; unless it swell past hiding , and then it's past watching .

You are such another !


Sir , my lord would instantly speak with you .

Where ?

At your own house ; there he unarms him .

Good boy , tell him I come .

I doubt he be hurt . Fare ye well , good niece .

Adieu , uncle .

I'll be with you , niece , by and by .

To bring , uncle ?

Ay , a token from Troilus .

By the same token , you are a bawd .

Words , vows , gifts , tears , and love's full sacrifice 
He offers in another's enterprise ;
But more in Troilus thousand-fold I see 
Than in the glass of Pandar's praise may be .
Yet hold I off . Women are angels , wooing :
Things won are done ; joy's soul lies in the doing :
That she belov'd knows nought that knows not this :
Men prize the thing ungain'd more than it is :
That she was never yet , that ever knew 
Love got so sweet as when desire did sue .
Therefore this maxim out of love I teach :
Achievement is command ; ungain'd , beseech :
Then though my heart's content firm love doth bear ,
Nothing of that shall from mine eyes appear .


Princes ,
What grief hath set the jaundice on your cheeks ?
The ample proposition that hope makes 
In all designs begun on earth below 
Fails in the promis'd largeness : checks and disasters 
Grow in the veins of actions highest rear'd ;
As knots , by the conflux of meeting sap ,
Infect the sound pine and divert his grain 
Tortive and errant from his course of growth .
Nor , princes , is it matter new to us 
That we come short of our suppose so far 
That after seven years' siege yet Troy walls stand ;
Sith every action that hath gone before ,
Whereof we have record , trial did draw 
Bias and thwart , not answering the aim ,
And that unbodied figure of the thought 
That gave't surmised shape . Why then , you princes ,
Do you with cheeks abash'd behold our works ,
And call them shames ? which are indeed nought else 
But the protractive trials of great Jove ,
To find persistive constancy in men :
The fineness of which metal is not found 
In Fortune's love ; for then , the bold and coward ,
The wise and fool , the artist and unread ,
The hard and soft , seem all affin'd and kin :
But , in the wind and tempest of her frown ,
Distinction , with a broad and powerful fan ,
Puffing at all , winnows the light away ;
And what hath mass or matter , by itself 
Lies rich in virtue and unmingled .

With due observance of thy god-like seat ,
Great Agamemnon , Nestor shall apply 
Thy latest words . In the reproof of chance 
Lies the true proof of men : the sea being smooth ,
How many shallow bauble boats dare sail 
Upon her patient breast , making their way 
With those of nobler bulk !
But let the ruffian Boreas once enrage 
The gentle Thetis , and anon behold 
The strong-ribb'd bark through liquid mountains cut ,
Bounding between the two moist elements ,
Like Perseus' horse : where's then the saucy boat 
Whose weak untimber'd sides but even now 
Co-rivall'd greatness ? either to harbour fled ,
Or made a toast for Neptune . Even so 
Doth valour's show and valour's worth divide 
In storms of fortune ; for in her ray and brightness 
The herd hath more annoyance by the breese 
Than by the tiger ; but when the splitting wind 
Makes flexible the knees of knotted oaks ,
And flies fled under shade , why then the thing of courage ,
As rous'd with rage , with rage doth sympathize ,
And with an accent tun'd in self-same key ,
Retorts to chiding fortune .

Agamemnon ,
Thou great commander , nerve and bone of Greece ,
Heart of our numbers , soul and only spirit ,
In whom the tempers and the minds of all 
Should be shut up , hear what Ulysses speaks .
Besides the applause and approbation 
The which ,

most mighty for thy place and sway ,


And thou most reverend for thy stretch'd-out life ,
I give to both your speeches , which were such 
As Agamemnon and the hand of Greece 
Should hold up high in brass ; and such again 
As venerable Nestor , hatch'd in silver ,
Should with a bond of air , strong as the axle-tree 
On which heaven rides , knit all the Greekish ears 
To his experienc'd tongue , yet let it please hoth ,
Thou great , and wise , to hear Ulysses speak .

Speak , Prince of Ithaca ; and be't of less expect 
That matter needless , of importless burden ,
Divide thy lips , than we are confident ,
When rank Thersites opes his mastick jaws ,
We shall hear music , wit , and oracle .

Troy , yet upon his basis , had been down ,
And the great Hector's sword had lack'd a master ,
But for these instances .
The specialty of rule hath been neglected :
And look , how many Grecian tents do stand 
Hollow upon this plain , so many hollow factions .
When that the general is not like the hive 
To whom the foragers shall all repair ,
What honey is expected ? Degree being vizarded ,
The unworthiest shows as fairly in the mask .
The heavens themselves , the planets , and this centre 
Observe degree , priority , and place ,
Insisture , course , proportion , season , form ,
Office , and custom , in all line of order :
And therefore is the glorious planet Sol 
In noble eminence enthron'd and spher'd 
Amidst the other ; whose med'cinable eye 
Corrects the ill aspects of planets evil ,
And posts , like the commandment of a king ,
Sans check , to good and bad : but when the planets 
In evil mixture to disorder wander ,
What plagues , and what portents , what mutiny ,
What raging of the sea , shaking of earth ,
Commotion in the winds , frights , changes , horrors ,
Divert and crack , rend and deracinate 
The unity and married calm of states 
Quite from their fixure ! O ! when degree is shak'd ,
Which is the ladder to all high designs ,
The enterprise is sick . How could communities ,
Degrees in schools , and brotherhoods in cities ,
Peaceful commerce from dividable shores ,
The primogenitive and due of birth ,
Prerogative of age , crowns , sceptres , laurels ,
But by degree , stand in authentic place ?
Take but degree away , untune that string ,
And , hark ! what discord follows ; each thing meets 
In mere oppugnancy : the bounded waters 
Should lift their bosoms higher than the shores ,
And make a sop of all this solid globe :
Strength should be lord of imbecility ,
And the rude son should strike his father dead :
Force should be right ; or rather , right and wrong 
Between whose endless jar justice resides 
Should lose their names , and so should justice too .
Then every thing includes itself in power ,
Power into will , will into appetite ;
And appetite , a universal wolf ,
So doubly seconded with will and power ,
Must make perforce a universal prey ,
And last eat up himself . Great Agamemnon ,
This chaos , when degree is suffocate ,
Follows the choking .
And this neglection of degree it is 
That by a pace goes backward , with a purpose 
It hath to climb . The general's disdain'd 
By him one step below , he by the next ,
That next by him beneath ; so every step ,
Exampled by the first pace that is sick 
Of his superior , grows to an envious fever 
Of pale and bloodless emulation :
And 'tis this fever that keeps Troy on foot ,
Not her own sinews . To end a tale of length ,
Troy in our weakness lives , not in her strength .

Most wisely hath Ulysses here discover'd 
The fever whereof all our power is sick .

The nature of the sickness found , Ulysses ,
What is the remedy ?

The great Achilles , whom opinion crowns 
The sinew and the forehand of our host ,
Having his ear full of his airy fame ,
Grows dainty of his worth , and in his tent 
Lies mocking our designs . With him Patroclus 
Upon a lazy bed the livelong day 
Breaks scurril jests ,
And with ridiculous and awkward action 
Which , slanderer , he imitation calls 
He pageants us . Sometime , great Agamemnon ,
Thy topless deputation he puts on 
And , like a strutting player , whose conceit 
Lies in his hamstring , and doth think it rich 
To hear the wooden dialogue and sound 
'Twixt his stretch'd footing and the scaffoldage ,
Such to-be-pitied and o'er-wrested seeming 
He acts thy greatness in :and when he speaks ,
'Tis like a chime a mending ; with terms unsquar'd ,
Which , from the tongue of roaring Typhon dropp'd ,
Would seem hyperboles . At this fusty stuff 
The large Achilles , on his press'd bed lolling ,
From his deep chest laughs out a loud applause ;
Cries , 'Excellent ! 'tis Agamemnon just .
Now play me Nestor ; hem , and stroke thy beard ,
As he being drest to some oration .' 
That's done ;as near as the extremest ends 
Of parallels , like as Vulcan and his wife :
Yet good Achilles still cries , 'Excellent !
'Tis Nestor right . Now play him me , Patroclus ,
Arming to answer in a night alarm .' 
And then , forsooth , the faint defects of age 
Must be the scene of mirth ; to cough and spit ,
And with a palsy-fumbling on his gorget ,
Shake in and out the rivet : and at this sport 
Sir Valour dies ; cries , 'O ! enough , Patroclus ;
Or give me ribs of steel ; I shall split all 
In pleasure of my spleen .' And in this fashion ,
All our abilities , gifts , natures , shapes ,
Severals and generals of grace exact ,
Achievements , plots , orders , preventions ,
Excitements to the field , or speech for truce ,
Success or loss , what is or is not , serves 
As stuff for these two to make paradoxes .

And in the imitation of these twain 
Whom , as Ulysses says , opinion crowns 
With an imperial voice many are infect .
Ajax is grown self-will'd , and bears his head 
In such a rein , in full as proud a place 
As broad Achilles ; keeps his tent like him ;
Makes factious feasts ; rails on our state of war ,
Bold as an oracle , and sets Thersites 
A slave whose gall coins slanders like a mint 
To match us in comparison with dirt ;
To weaken and discredit our exposure ,
How rank soever rounded in with danger .

They tax our policy , and call it cowardice ;
Count wisdom as no member of the war ;
Forestall prescience , and esteem no act 
But that of hand : the still and mental parts ,
That do contrive how many hands shall strike ,
When fitness calls them on , and know by measure 
Of their observant toil the enemies' weight ,
Why , this hath not a finger's dignity :
They call this bed-work , mappery , closet-war ;
So that the ram that batters down the wall ,
For the great swing and rudeness of his poise ,
They place before his hand that made the engine ,
Or those that with the fineness of their souls 
By reason guides his execution .

Let this be granted , and Achilles' horse 
Makes many Thetis' sons .


What trumpet ? look , Menelaus .

From Troy .


What would you 'fore our tent ?

Is this great Agamemnon's tent , I pray you ?

Even this .

May one , that is a herald and a prince ,
Do a fair message to his kingly ears ?

With surety stronger than Achilles' arm 
'Fore all the Greekish heads , which with one voice 
Call Agamemnon head and general .

Fair leave and large security . How may 
A stranger to those most imperial looks 
Know them from eyes of other mortals ?

How !

Ay ;
I ask , that I might waken reverence ,
And bid the cheek be ready with a blush 
Modest as morning when she coldly eyes 
The youthful Ph bus :
Which is that god in office , guiding men ?
Which is the high and mighty Agamemnon ?

This Trojan scorns us ; or the men of Troy 
Are ceremonious courtiers .

Courtiers as free , as debonair , unarm'd ,
As bending angels ; that's their fame in peace :
But when they would seem soldiers , they have galls ,
Good arms , strong joints , true swords ; and , Jove's accord ,
Nothing so full of heart . But peace ,  neas !
Peace , Trojan ! lay thy finger on thy lips !
The worthiness of praise distains his worth ,
If that the prais'd himself bring the praise forth ;
But what the repining enemy commends ,
That breath fame blows ; that praise , sole pure , transcends .

Sir , you of Troy , call you yourself  neas ?

Ay , Greek , that is my name .

What's your affair , I pray you ?

Sir , pardon ; 'tis for Agamemnon's ears .

He hears nought privately that comes from Troy .

Nor I from Troy come not to whisper him :
I bring a trumpet to awake his ear ,
To set his sense on the attentive bent ,
And then to speak .

Speak frankly as the wind :
It is not Agamemnon's sleeping hour ;
That thou shalt know , Trojan , he is awake ,
He tells thee so himself .

Trumpet , blow aloud ,
Send thy brass voice through all these lazy tents ;
And every Greek of mettle , let him know ,
What Troy means fairly shall be spoke aloud .

We have , great Agamemnon , here in Troy .
A prince called Hector ,Priam is his father ,
Who in this dull and long-continu'd truce 
Is rusty grown : he bade me take a trumpet ,
And to this purpose speak : kings , princes , lords !
If there be one among the fair'st of Greece 
That holds his honour higher than his ease ,
That seeks his praise more than he fears his peril ,
That knows his valour , and knows not his fear ,
That loves his mistress more than in confession ,
With truant vows to her own lips he loves ,
And dare avow her beauty and her worth 
In other arms than hers ,to him this challenge .
Hector , in view of Trojans and of Greeks ,
Shall make it good , or do his best to do it ,
He hath a lady wiser , fairer , truer ,
Than ever Greek did compass in his arms ;
And will to-morrow with his trumpet call ,
Mid-way between your tents and walls of Troy ,
To rouse a Grecian that is true in love :
If any come , Hector shall honour him ;
If none , he'll say in Troy when he retires ,
The Grecian dames are sunburnt , and not worth 
The splinter of a lance . Even so much .

This shall be told our lovers , Lord  neas ;
If none of them have soul in such a kind ,
We left them all at home : but we are soldiers ;
And may that soldier a mere recreant prove ,
That means not , hath not , or is not in love !
If then one is , or hath , or means to be ,
That one meets Hector ; if none else , I am he .

Tell him of Nestor , one that was a man 
When Hector's grandsire suck'd : he is old now ;
But if there be not in our Grecian host 
One noble man that hath one spark of fire 
To answer for his love , tell him from me ,
I'll hide my silver beard in a gold beaver ,
And in my vantbrace put this wither'd brawn ;
And , meeting him , will tell him that my lady 
Was fairer than his grandam , and as chaste 
As may be in the world : his youth in flood ,
I'll prove this truth with my three drops of blood .

Now heavens forbid such scarcity of youth !

Amen .

Fair Lord  neas , let me touch your hand ;
To our pavilion shall I lead you first .
Achilles shall have word of this intent ;
So shall each lord of Greece , from tent to tent :
Yourself shall feast with us before you go ,
And find the welcome of a noble foe .


Nestor !

What says Ulysses ?

I have a young conception in my brain ;
Be you my time to bring it to some shape .

What is't ?

This 'tis :
Blunt wedges rive hard knots : the seeded pride 
That hath to this maturity blown up 
In rank Achilles , must or now be cropp'd ,
Or , shedding , breed a nursery of like evil ,
To overbulk us all .

Well , and how ?

This challenge that the gallant Hector sends ,
However it is spread in general name ,
Relates in purpose only to Achilles .

The purpose is perspicuous even as substance 
Whose grossness little characters sum up :
And , in the publication , make no strain ,
But that Achilles , were his brain as barren 
As banks of Libya ,though , Apollo knows ,
'Tis dry enough ,will with great speed of judgment ,
Ay , with celerity , find Hector's purpose 
Pointing on him .

And wake him to the answer , think you ?

Yes , 'tis most meet : whom may you else oppose ,
That can from Hector bring those honours off ,
If not Achilles ? Though't be a sportful combat ,
Yet in the trial much opinion dwells ;
For here the Trojans taste our dear'st repute 
With their fin'st palate : and trust to me , Ulysses ,
Our imputation shall be oddly pois'd 
In this wild action ; for the success ,
Although particular , shall give a scantling 
Of good or bad unto the general ;
And in such indexes , although small pricks 
To their subsequent volumes , there is seen 
The baby figure of the giant mass 
Of things to come at large . It is suppos'd 
He that meets Hector issues from our choice ;
And choice , being mutual act of all our souls ,
Makes merit her election , and doth boil ,
As 'twere from forth us all , a man distill'd 
Out of our virtues ; who miscarrying ,
What heart receives from bence the conquering part ,
To steel a strong opinion to themselves ?
Which entertain'd , limbs are his instruments ,
In no less working than are swords and bows 
Directive by the limbs .

Give pardon to my speech :
Therefore 'tis meet Achilles meet not Hector .
Let us like merchants show our foulest wares ,
And think perchance they'll sell ; if not ,
The lustre of the better yet to show 
Shall show the better . Do not consent 
That ever Hector and Achilles meet ;
For both our honour and our shame in this 
Are dogg'd with two strange followers .

I see them not with my old eyes : what are they ?

What glory our Achilles shares from Hector ,
Were he not proud , we all should share with him :
But he already is too insolent ;
And we were better parch in Afric sun 
Than in the pride and salt scorn of his eyes ,
Should he 'scape Hector fair : if he were foil'd ,
Why then we did our main opinion crush 
In taint of our best man . No ; make a lottery ;
And by device let blockish Ajax draw 
The sort to fight with Hector : among ourselves 
Give him allowance as the worthier man ,
For that will physic the great Myrmidon 
Who broils in loud applause ; and make him fall 
His crest that prouder than blue Iris bends .
If the dull brainless Ajax come safe off ,
We'll dress him up in voices : if he fail ,
Yet go we under our opinion still 
That we have better men . But , hit or miss ,
Our project's life this shape of sense assumes :
Ajax employ'd plucks down Achilles' plumes .

Ulysses ,
Now I begin to relish thy advice ;
And I will give a taste of it forthwith 
To Agamemnon : go we to him straight .
Two curs shall tame each other : pride alone 
Must tarre the mastiffs on , as 'twere their bone .


Thersites !

Agamemnon , how if he had boils ? full , all over , generally ?

Thersites !

And those boils did run ? Say so , did not the general run then ? were not that a botchy core ?

Dog !

Then would come some matter from him : I see none now .

Thou bitch-wolf's son , canst thou not hear ?
Feel , then .


The plague of Greece upon thee , thou mongrel beef-witted lord !

Speak then , thou vinewedst leaven , speak : I will beat thee into handsomeness .

I shall sooner rail thee into wit and holiness : but I think thy horse will sooner con an oration than thou learn a prayer without book . Thou canst strike , canst thou ? a red murrain o' thy jade's tricks !

Toadstool , learn me the proclamation .

Dost thou think I have no sense , thou strikest me thus ?

The proclamation !

Thou art proclaimed a fool , I think .

Do not , porpentine , do not : my fingers itch .

I would thou didst itch from head to foot , and I had the scratching of thee ; I would make thee the loathsomest scab of Greece . When thou art forth in the incursions , thou strikest as slow as another .

I say , the proclamation !

Thou grumblest and railest every hour on Achilles , and thou art as full of envy at his greatness as Cerberus is at Proserpina's beauty , ay that thou barkest at him .

Mistress Thersites !

Thou shouldst strike him .

Cobloaf !

He would pun thee into shivers with his fist , as a sailor breaks a biscuit .

You whoreson cur .


Do , do .

Thou stool for a witch !

Ay , do , do ; thou sodden-witted lord ! thou hast no more brain than I have in mine elbows ; an assinego may tutor thee : thou scurvy-valiant ass ! thou art here but to thrash Trojans ; and thou art bought and sold among those of any wit , like a barbarian slave . If thou use to beat me , I will begin at thy heel , and tell what thou art by inches , thou thing of no bowels , thou !

You dog !

You scurvy lord !

You cur !


Mars his idiot ! do , rudeness ; do , camel ; do , do .


Why , how now , Ajax ! wherefore do you this ?
How now , Thersites ! what's the matter , man ?

You see him there , do you ?

Ay ; what's the matter ?

Nay , look upon him .

So I do : what's the matter ?

Nay , but regard him well .

'Well !' why , so I do .

But yet you look not well upon him ; for , whosoever you take him to be , he is Ajax .

I know that , fool .

Ay , but that fool knows not himself .

Therefore I beat thee .

Lo , lo , lo , lo , what modicums of wit he utters ! his evasions have ears thus long . I have bobbed his brain more than he has beat my bones : I will buy nine sparrows for a penny , and his pia mater is not worth the ninth part of a sparrow . This lord , Achilles , Ajax , who wears his wit in his belly , and his guts in his head , I'll tell you what I say of him .

What ?

I say , this Ajax ,


Nay , good Ajax .

Has not so much wit 

Nay , I must hold you .

As will stop the eye of Helen's needle , for whom he comes to fight .

Peace , fool !

I would have peace and quietness , but the fool will not : he there ; that he ; look you there .

O thou damned cur ! I shall 

Will you set your wit to a fool's ?

No , I warrant you ; for a fool's will shame it .

Good words , Thersites .

What's the quarrel ?

I bade the vile owl go learn me the tenour of the proclamation , and he rails upon me .

I serve thee not .

Well , go to , go to .

I serve here voluntary .

Your last service was sufferance , 'twas not voluntary ; no man is beaten voluntary : Ajax was here the voluntary , and you as under an impress .

Even so ; a great deal of your wit too lies in your sinews , or else there be liars . Hector shall have a great catch if he knock out either of your brains : a' were as good crack a fusty nut with no kernel .

What , with me too , Thersites ?

There's Ulysses and old Nestor , whose wit was mouldy ere your grandsires had nails on their toes , yoke you like draught-oxen , and make you plough up the wars .

What , what ?

Yes , good sooth : to , Achilles ! to , Ajax ! to !

I shall cut out your tongue .

'Tis no matter ; I shall speak as much as thou afterwards .

No more words , Thersites ; peace !

I will hold my peace when Achilles' brach bids me , shall I ?

There's for you , Patroclus .

I will see you hanged , like clotpoles , ere I come any more to your tents : I will keep where there is wit stirring and leave the faction of fools .


A good riddance .

Marry , this , sir , is proclaim'd through all our host :
That Hector , by the fifth hour of the sun ,
Will , with a trumpet , 'twixt our tents and Troy 
To morrow morning call some knight to arms 
That hath a stomach ; and such a one that dare 
Maintain I know not what : 'tis trash . Farewell .

Farewell . Who shall answer him ?

I know not : it is put to lottery ; otherwise ,
He knew his man .

O , meaning you . I will go learn more of it .


After so many hours , lives , speeches spent ,
Thus once again says Nestor from the Greeks :
'Deliver Helen , and all damage else ,
As honour , loss of time , travail , expense ,
Wounds , friends , and what else dear that is consum'd 
In hot digestion of this cormorant war ,
Shall be struck off .' Hector , what say you to't ?

Though no man lesser fears the Greeks than I ,
As far as toucheth my particular ,
Yet , dread Priam ,
There is no lady of more softer bowels ,
More spongy to suck in the sense of fear ,
More ready to cry out 'Who knows what follows ?' 
Than Hector is . The wound of peace is surety ,
Surety secure ; but modest doubt is call'd 
The beacon of the wise , the tent that searches 
To the bottom of the worst . Let Helen go :
Since the first sword was drawn about this question ,
Every tithe soul , 'mongst many thousand dismes ,
Hath been as dear as Helen ; I mean , of ours :
If we have lost so many tenths of ours ,
To guard a thing not ours nor worth to us ,
Had it our name , the value of one ten ,
What merit's in that reason which denies 
The yielding of her up ?

Fie , fie ! my brother ,
Weigh you the worth and honour of a king 
So great as our dread father in a scale 
Of common ounces ? will you with counters sum 
The past proportion of his infinite ?
And buckle in a waist most fathomless 
With spans and inches so diminutive 
As fears and reasons ? fie , for godly shame !

No marvel , though you bite so sharp at reasons ,
You are so empty of them . Should not our father 
Bear the great sway of his affairs with reasons ,
Because your speech hath none that tells him so ?

You are for dreams and slumbers , brother priest ;
You fur your gloves with reason . Here are your reasons :
You know an enemy intends you harm ;
You know a sword employ'd is perilous ,
And reason flies the object of all harm :
Who marvels then , when Helenus beholds 
A Grecian and his sword , if he do set 
The very wings of reason to his heels ,
And fly like chidden Mercury from Jove ,
Or like a star disorb'd ? Nay , if we talk of reason ,
Let's shut our gates and sleep : manhood and honour 
Should have hare-hearts , would they but fat their thoughts 
With this cramm'd reason : reason and respect 
Make livers pale , and lustihood deject .

Brother , she is not worth what she doth cost 
The holding .

What is aught but as 'tis valu'd ?

But value dwells not in particular will ;
It holds his estimate and dignity 
As well wherein 'tis precious of itself 
As in the prizer . 'Tis mad idolatry 
To make the service greater than the god ;
And the will dotes that is inclinable 
To what infectiously itself affects ,
Without some image of the affected merit .

I take to-day a wife , and my election 
Is led on in the conduct of my will ;
My will enkindled by mine eyes and ears ,
Two traded pilots 'twixt the dangerous shores 
Of will and judgment . How may I avoid ,
Although my will distaste what it elected ,
The wife I chose ? there can be no evasion 
To blench from this and to stand firm by honour .
We turn not back the silks upon the merchant 
When we have soil'd them , nor the remainder viands 
We do not throw in unrespective sink 
Because we now are full . It was thought meet 
Paris should do some vengeance on the Greeks :
Your breath of full consent bellied his sails ;
The seas and winds old wranglers took a truce 
And did him service : he touch'd the ports desir'd ,
And for an old aunt whom the Greeks held captive 
He brought a Grecian queen , whose youth and freshness 
Wrinkles Apollo's , and makes stale the morning .
Why keep we her ? the Grecians keep our aunt :
Is she worth keeping ? why , she is a pearl ,
Whose price hath launch'd above a thousand ships ,
And turn'd crown'd kings to merchants .
If you'll avouch 'twas wisdom Paris went ,
As you must needs , for you all cried 'Go , go ,' 
If you'll confess he brought home noble prize ,
As you must needs , for you all clapp'd your hands ,
And cry'd 'Inestimable !' why do you now 
The issue of your proper wisdoms rate ,
And do a deed that Fortune never did ,
Beggar the estimation which you priz'd 
Richer than sea and land ? O ! theft most base ,
That we have stol'n what we do fear to keep !
But thieves unworthy of a thing so stol'n ,
That in their country did them that disgrace 
We fear to warrant in our native place .

Cry , Trojans , cry !

What noise ? what shriek ?

'Tis our mad sister , I do know her voice 

Cry , Trojans !

It is Cassandra .


Cry , Trojans , cry ! lend me ten thousand eyes ,
And I will fill them with prophetic tears .

Peace , sister , peace !

Virgins and boys , mid-age and wrinkled eld ,
Soft infancy , that nothing canst but cry ,
Add to my clamours ! let us pay betimes 
A moiety of that mass of moan to come .
Cry , Trojans , cry ! practise your eyes with tears !
Troy must not be , nor goodly Ilion stand ;
Our firebrand brother , Paris , burns us all .
Cry , Trojans , cry ! a Helen and a woe !
Cry , cry ! Troy burns , or else let Helen go .


Now , youthful Troilus , do not these high strains 
Of divination in our sister work 
Some touches of remorse ? or is your blood 
So madly hot that no discourse of reason ,
Nor fear of bad success in a bad cause ,
Can qualify the same ?

Why , brother Hector ,
We may not think the justness of each act 
Such and no other than event doth form it ,
Nor once deject the courage of our minds ,
Because Cassandra's mad : her brain-sick raptures 
Cannot distaste the goodness of a quarrel 
Which hath our several honours all engag'd 
To make it gracious . For my private part ,
I am no more touch'd than all Priam's sons ;
And Jove forbid there should be done amongst us 
Such things as might offend the weakest spleen 
To fight for and maintain .

Else might the world convince of levity 
As well my undertakings as your counsels ;
But I attest the gods , your full consent 
Gave wings to my propension and cut off 
All fears attending on so dire a project :
For what , alas ! can these my single arms ?
What propugnation is in one man's valour ,
To stand the push and enmity of those 
This quarrel would excite ? Yet , I protest ,
Were I alone to pass the difficulties ,
And had as ample power as I have will ,
Paris should ne'er retract what he hath done ,
Nor faint in the pursuit .

Paris , you speak 
Like one besotted on your sweet delights :
You have the honey still , but these the gall ;
So to be valiant is no praise at all .

Sir , I propose not merely to myself 
The pleasure such a beauty brings with it ;
But I would have the soil of her fair rape 
Wip'd off , in honourable keeping her .
What treason were it to the ransack'd queen ,
Disgrace to your great worths , and shame to me ,
Now to deliver her possession up ,
On terms of base compulsion ! Can it be 
That so degenerate a strain as this 
Should once set footing in your generous bosoms ?
There's not the meanest spirit on our party 
Without a heart to dare or sword to draw 
When Helen is defended , nor none so noble 
Whose life were ill bestow'd or death unfam'd 
Where Helen is the subject : then , I say ,
Well may we fight for her , whom , we know well ,
The world's large spaces cannot parallel .

Paris and Troilus , you have both said well ;
And on the cause and question now in hand 
Have gloz'd , but superficially ; not much 
Unlike young men , whom Aristotle thought 
Unfit to hear moral philosophy .
The reasons you allege do more conduce 
To the hot passion of distemper'd blood 
Than to make up a free determination 
'Twixt right and wrong ; for pleasure and revenge 
Have ears more deaf than adders to the voice 
Of any true decision . Nature craves 
All dues be render'd to their owners : now ,
What nearer debt in all humanity 
Than wife is to the husband ? if this law 
Of nature be corrupted through affection ,
And that great minds , of partial indulgence 
To their benumbed wills , resist the saine ;
There is a law in each well-order'd nation 
To curb those raging appetites that are 
Most disobedient and refractory .
If Helen then be wife to Sparta's king ,
As it is known she is , these moral laws 
Of nature , and of nations , speak aloud 
To have her back return'd : thus to persist 
In doing wrong extenuates not wrong ,
But makes it much more heavy . Hector's opinion 
Is this , in way of truth ; yet , ne'ertheless ,
My spritely brethren , I propend to you 
In resolution to keep Helen still ;
For 'tis a cause that hath no mean dependance 
Upon our joint and several dignities .

Why , there you touch'd the life of our design :
Were it not glory that we more affected 
Than the performance of our heaving spleens ,
I would not wish a drop of Trojan blood 
Spent more in her defence . But , worthy Hector ,
She is a theme of honour and renown ,
A spur to valiant and magnanimous deeds ,
Whose present courage may beat down our foes ,
And fame in time to come canonize us ;
For , I presume , brave Hector would not lose 
So rich advantage of a promis'd glory 
As smiles upon the forehead of this action 
For the wide world's revenue .

I am yours ,
You valiant offspring of great Priamus .
I have a roisting challenge sent amongst 
The dull and factious nobles of the Greeks 
Will strike amazement to their drowsy spirits .
I was advertis'd their great general slept 
Whilst emulation in the army crept :
This , I presume , will wake him .


How now , Thersites ! what , lost in the labyrinth of thy fury ! Shall the elephant Ajax carry it thus ? he beats me , and I rail at him : O worthy satisfaction ! Would it were otherwise ; that I could beat him , whilst he railed at me . 'Sfoot , I'll learn to conjure and raise devils , but I'll see some issue of my spiteful execrations . Then there's Achilles , a rare enginer . If Troy be not taken till these two undermine it , the walls will stand till they fall of themselves . O ! thou great thunder-darter of Olympus , forget that thou art Jove the king of gods , and , Mercury , lose all the serpentine craft of thy caduceus , if ye take not that little little less than little wit from them that they have ; which short-armed ignorance itself knows is so abundant scarce it will not in circumvention deliver a fly from a spider , without drawing their massy irons and cutting the web . After this , the vengeance on the whole camp ! or , rather , the Neapolitan bone-ache ! for that , methinks , is the curse dependant on those that war for a placket . I have said my prayers , and devil Envy say Amen . What , ho ! my Lord Achilles !


Who's there ? Thersites ! Good Thersites , come in and rail .

If I could have remembered a gilt counterfeit , thou wouldst not have slipped out of my contemplation : but it is no matter ; thyself upon thyself ! The common curse of mankind , folly and ignorance , be thine in great revenue ! heaven bless thee from a tutor , and discipline come not near thee ! Let thy blood be thy direction till thy death ! then , if she that lays thee out says thou art a fair corpse , I'll be sworn and sworn upon't she never shrouded any but lazars . Amen . Where's Achilles ?

What ! art thou devout ? wast thou in prayer ?

Ay ; the heavens hear me !


Who's there ?

Thersites , my lord .

Where , where ? Art thou come ? Why , my cheese , my digestion , why hast thou not served thyself in to my table so many meals ? Come , what's Agamemnon ?

Thy commander , Achilles . Then tell me , Patroclus , what's Achilles ?

Thy lord , Thersites . Then tell me , I pray thee , what's thyself ?

Thy knower , Patroclus . Then tell me , Patroclus , what art thou ?

Thou mayst tell that knowest .

O ! tell , tell .

I'll decline the whole question . Agamemnon commands Achilles ; Achilles is my lord ; I am Patroclus' knower ; and Patroclus is a fool .

You rascal !

Peace , fool ! I have not done .

He is a privileged man . Proceed , Thersites .

Agamemnon is a fool ; Achilles is a fool ; Thersites is a fool ; and , as aforesaid , Patroclus is a fool .

Derive this ; come .

Agamemnon is a fool to offer to command Achilles ; Achilles is a fool to be commanded of Agamemnon ; Thersites is a fool to serve such a fool ; and Patroclus is a fool positive .

Why am I a fool ?

Make that demand to the Creator . It suffices me thou art . Look you , who comes here ?

Patroclus , I'll speak with nobody . Come in with me , Thersites .


Here is such patchery , such juggling , and such knavery ! all the argument is a cuckold and a whore ; a good quarrel to draw emulous factions and bleed to death upon . Now , the dry serpigo on the subject ! and war and lechery confound all !

Where is Achilles ?

Within his tent ; but ill-dispos'd , my lord .

Let it be known to him that we are here .
He shent our messengers ; and we lay by 
Our appertainments , visiting of him :
Let him be told so ; lest perchance he think 
We dare not move the question of our place ,
Or know not what we are .

I shall say so to him .


We saw him at the opening of his tent :
He is not sick .

Yes , lion-sick , sick of proud heart : you may call it melancholy if you will favour the man ; but , by my head , 'tis pride : but why , why ? let him show us a cause . A word , my lord .


What moves Ajax thus to bay at him ?

Achilles hath inveigled his fool from him .

Who , Thersites ?

He .

Then will Ajax lack matter , if he have lost his argument .

No ; you see , he is his argument that has his argument , Achilles .

All the better ; their fraction is more our wish than their faction : but it was a strong composure a fool could disunite .

The amity that wisdom knits not folly may easily untie . Here comes Patroclus .


No Achilles with him .

The elephant hath joints , but none for courtesy : his legs are legs for necessity , not for flexure .

Achilles bids me say , he is much sorry 
If any thing more than your sport and pleasure 
Did move your greatness and this noble state 
To call upon him ; he hopes it is no other 
But , for your health and your digestion sake ,
An after-dinner's breath .

Hear you , Patroclus :
We are too well acquainted with these answers :
But his evasion , wing'd thus swift with scorn ,
Cannot outfly our apprehensions .
Much attribute he hath , and much the reason 
Why we ascribe it to him ; yet all his virtues ,
Not virtuously on his own part beheld ,
Do in our eyes begin to lose their gloss ,
Yea , like fair fruit in an unwholesome dish ,
Are like to rot untasted . Go and tell him ,
We come to speak with him ; and you shall not sin 
If you do say we think him over-proud 
And under-honest , in self-assumption greater 
Than in the note of judgment ; and worthier than himself 
Here tend the savage strangeness he puts on ,
Disguise the holy strength of their command ,
And underwrite in an observing kind 
His humorous predominance ; yea , watch 
His pettish lunes , his ebbs , his flows , as if 
The passage and whole carriage of this action 
Rode on his tide . Go tell him this , and add ,
That if he overhold his price so much ,
We'll none of him ; but let him , like an engine 
Not portable , lie under this report :
'Bring action hither , this cannot go to war :' 
A stirring dwarf we do allowance give 
Before a sleeping giant : tell him so .

I shall ; and bring his answer presently .


In second voice we'll not be satisfied ;
We come to speak with him . Ulysses , enter you .


What is he more than another ?

No more than what he thinks he is .

Is he so much ? Do you not think he thinks himself a better man than I am ?

No question .

Will you subscribe his thought , and say he is ?

No , noble Ajax ; you are as strong , as valiant , as wise , no less noble , much more gentle , and altogether more tractable .

Why should a man be proud ? How doth pride grow ? I know not what pride is .

Your mind is the clearer , Ajax , and your virtues the fairer . He that is proud eats up himself : pride is his own glass , his own trumpet , his own chronicle ; and whatever praises itself but in the deed , devours the deed in the praise .

I do hate a proud man , as I hate the engendering of toads .

Yet he loves himself : is't not strange ?


Achilles will not to the field to-morrow .

What's his excuse ?

He doth rely on none ,
But carries on the stream of his dispose 
Without observance or respect of any ,
In will peculiar and in self-admission .

Why will he not upon our fair request 
Untent his person and share the air with us ?

Things small as nothing , for request's sake only ,
He makes important : possess'd he is with greatness ,
And speaks not to himself but with a pride 
That quarrels at self-breath : imagin'd worth 
Holds in his blood such swoln and hot discourse ,
That 'twixt his mental and his active parts 
Kingdom'd Achilles in commotion rages 
And batters down himself : what should I say ?
He is so plaguy proud , that the death-tokens of it 
Cry 'No recovery .' 

Let Ajax go to him .
Dear lord , go you and meet him in his tent :
'Tis said he holds you well , and will be led 
At your request a little from himself .

O Agamemnon ! let it not be so .
We'll consecrate the steps that Ajax makes 
When they go from Achilles : shall the proud lord 
That bastes his arrogance with his own seam ,
And never suffers matter of the world 
Enter his thoughts , save such as do revolve 
And ruminate himself , shall he be worshipp'd 
Of that we hold an idol more than he ?
No , this thrice-worthy and right valiant lord 
Must not so stale his palm , nobly acquir'd ;
Nor , by my will , assubjugate his merit ,
As amply titled as Achilles is ,
By going to Achilles :
That were to enlard his fat-already pride ,
And add more coals to Cancer when he burns 
With entertaining great Hyperion .
This lord go to him ! Jupiter forbid ,
And say in thunder , 'Achilles go to him .' 

O ! this is well ; he rubs the vein of him .

And how his silence drinks up this applause !

If I go to him , with my armed fist 
I'll pash him o'er the face .

O , no ! you shall not go .

An a' be proud with me , I'll pheeze his pride .
Let me go to him .

Not for the worth that hangs upon our quarrel .

A paltry , insolent fellow !

How he describes himself !

Can he not be sociable ?

The raven chides blackness .

I'll let his humours blood .

He will be the physician that should be the patient .

An all men were o' my mind ,

Wit would be out of fashion .

A' should not bear it so , a' should eat swords first : shall pride carry it ?

An't would , you'd carry half .

A' would have ten shares .

I will knead him ; I will make him supple .

He's not yet through warm : force him with praises : pour in , pour in ; his ambition is dry .

My lord , you feed too much on this dislike .

Our noble general , do not do so .

You must prepare to fight without Achilles .

Why , 'tis this naming of him does him harm .
Here is a man but 'tis before his face ;
I will be silent .

Wherefore should you so ?
He is not emulous , as Achilles is .

Know the whole world , he is as valiant .

A whoreson dog , that shall palter thus with us ! Would he were a Trojan !

What a vice were it in Ajax now ,

If he were proud ,

Or covetous of praise ,

Ay , or surly borne ,

Or strange , or self-affected !

Thank the heavens , lord , thou art of sweet composure ;
Praise him that got thee , her that gave thee suck :
Fam'd be thy tutor , and thy parts of nature 
Thrice-fam'd , beyond all erudition :
But he that disciplin'd thy arms to fight ,
Let Mars divide eternity in twain ,
And give him half : and , for thy vigour ,
Bull-bearing Milo his addition yield 
To sinewy Ajax . I will not praise thy wisdom ,
Which , like a bourn , a pale , a shore , confines 
Thy spacious and dilated parts : here's Nestor 
Instructed by the antiquary times ,
He must , he is , he cannot but be wise ;
But pardon , father Nestor , were your days 
As green as Ajax , and your brain so temper'd ,
You should not have the eminence of him ,
But be as Ajax .

Shall I call you father ?

Ay , my good son .

Be rul'd by him , Lord Ajax .

There is no tarrying here ; the hart Achilles 
Keeps thicket . Please it our great general 
To call together all his state of war ;
Fresh kings are come to Troy : to-morrow ,
We must with all our main of power stand fast :
And here's a lord ,come knights from east to west ,
And cull their flower , Ajax shall cope the best .

Go we to council . Let Achilles sleep :
Light boats sail swift , though greater hulks draw deep .


Friend ! you ! pray you , a word : do not you follow the young Lord Paris ?

Ay , sir , when he goes before me .

You depend upon him , I mean ?

Sir , I do depend upon the Lord .

You depend upon a noble gentleman ;
I must needs praise him .

The Lord be praised !

You know me , do you not ?

Faith , sir , superficially .

Friend , know me better . I am the 
Lord Pandarus .

I hope I shall know your honour better .

I do desire it .

You are in the state of grace .

Grace ! not so , friend ; honour and lordship are my titles .

What music is this ?

I do but partly know , sir : it is music in parts .

Know you the musicians ?

Wholly , sir .

Who play they to ?

To the hearers , sir .

At whose pleasure , friend ?

At mine , sir , and theirs that love music .

Command , I mean , friend .

Who shall I command , sir ?

Friend , we understand not one another :
I am too courtly , and thou art too cunning . At whose request do these men play ?

That's to't , indeed , sir . Marry , sir , at the request of Paris my lord , who is there in person ; with him the mortal Venus , the heartblood of beauty , love's invisible soul .

Who , my cousin Cressida ?

No , sir , Helen : could you not find out that by her attributes ?

It should seem , fellow , that thou hast not seen the Lady Cressida . I come to speak with Paris from the Prince Troilus : I will make a complimental assault upon him , for my business seethes .

Sodden business : there's a stewed phrase , indeed .


Fair be to you , my lord , and to all this fair company ! fair desires , in all fair measures , fairly guide them ! especially to you , fair queen ! fair thoughts be your fair pillow !

Dear lord , you are full of fair words .

You speak your fair pleasure , sweet queen . Fair prince , here is good broken music .

You have broke it , cousin ; and , by my life , you shall make it whole again : you shall piece it out with a piece of your performance . Nell , he is full of harmony .

Truly , lady , no .

O , sir !

Rude , in sooth ; in good sooth , very rude .

Well said , my lord ! Well , you say so in fits .

I have business to my lord , dear queen .
My lord , will you vouchsafe me a word ?

Nay , this shall not hedge us out : we'll hear you sing , certainly .

Well , sweet queen , you are pleasant with me . But , marry , thus , my lord . My dear lord and most esteemed friend , your brother Troilus 

My Lord Pandarus ; honey-sweet lord ,

Go to , sweet queen , go to : commends himself most affectionately to you .

You shall not bob us out of our melody : if you do , our melancholy upon your head !

Sweet queen , sweet queen ! that's a sweet queen , i' faith .

And to make a sweet lady sad is a sour offence .

Nay , that shall not serve your turn ; that shall it not , in truth , la ! Nay , I care not for such words : no , no . And , my lord , he desires you , that if the king call for him at supper , you will make his excuse .

My Lord Pandarus ,

What says my sweet queen , my very sweet queen ?

What exploit's in hand ? where sups he to-night ?

Nay , but my lord ,

What says my sweet queen ! My cousin will fall out with you . You must know where he sups .

I'll lay my life , with my disposer Cressida .

No , no , no such matter ; you are wide . Come , your disposer is sick .

Well , I'll make excuse .

Ay , good my lord . Why should you say Cressida ? no , your poor disposer's sick .

I spy .

You spy ! what do you spy ? Come , give me an instrument . Now , sweet queen .

Why , this is kindly done .

My niece is horribly in love with a thing you have , sweet queen .

She shall have it , my lord , if it be not my Lord Paris .

He ! no , she'll none of him ; they two are twain .

Falling in , after falling out , may make them three .

Come , come , I'll hear no more of this .
I'll sing you a song now .

Ay , ay , prithee now . By my troth , sweet lord , thou hast a fine forehead .

Ay , you may , you may .

Let thy song be love : this love will undo us all . O Cupid , Cupid , Cupid !

Love ! ay , that it shall , i' faith .

Ay , good now , love , love , nothing but love .

In good troth , it begins so :


Love , love , nothing but love , still more !
For , oh ! love's bow 
Shoots buck and doe :
The shaft confounds ,
Not that it wounds ,
But tickles still the sore .
These lovers cry O ! O ! they die !
Yet that which seems the wound to kill ,
Doth turn O ! O ! to ha ! ha ! he !
So dying love lives still :
O ! O ! a while , but ha ! ha ! ha !
O ! O ! groans out for ha ! ha ! ha !

Heigh-ho !

In love , i' faith , to the very tip of the nose .

He eats nothing but doves , love ; and that breeds hot blood , and hot blood begets hot thoughts , and hot thoughts beget hot deeds , and hot deeds is love .

Is this the generation of love ? hot blood ? hot thoughts , and hot deeds ? Why , they are vipers : is love a generation of vipers ? Sweet lord , who's a-field to-day ?

Hector , Deiphobus , Helenus , Antenor , and all the gallantry of Troy : I would fain have armed to-day , but my Nell would not have it so . How chance my brother Troilus went not ?

He hangs the lip at something : you know all , Lord Pandarus .

Not I , honey-sweet queen . I long to hear how they sped to-day . You'll remember your brother's excuse ?

To a hair .

Farewell , sweet queen .

Commend me to your niece .

I will , sweet queen .


They're come from field : let us to Priam's hall 
To greet the warriors . Sweet Helen , I must woo you 
To help unarm our Hector : his stubborn buckles ,
With these your white enchanting fingers touch'd ,
Shall more obey than to the edge of steel 
Or force of Greekish sinews ; you shall do more 
Than all the island kings ,disarm great Hector .

'Twill make us proud to be his servant , Paris ;
Yea , what he shall receive of us in duty 
Gives us more palm in beauty than we have ,
Yea , overshines ourself .

Sweet , above thought I love thee .


How now ! where's thy master ? at my cousin Cressida's ?

No , sir ; he stays for you to conduct him thither .


O ! here he comes . How now , how now !

Sirrah , walk off .


Have you seen my cousin ?

No , Pandarus : I stalk about her door ,
Like a strange soul upon the Stygian banks 
Staying for waftage . O ! be thou my Charon ,
And give me swift transportance to those fields 
Where I may wallow in the lily-beds 
Propos'd for the deserver ! O gentle Pandarus !
From Cupid's shoulder pluck his painted wings ,
And fly with me to Cressid .

Walk here i' the orchard . I'll bring her straight .


I am giddy , expectation whirls me round .
The imaginary relish is so sweet 
That it enchants my sense . What will it be 
When that the watery palate tastes indeed 
Love's thrice-repured nectar ? death , I fear me ,
Swounding destruction , or some joy too fine ,
Too subtle-potent , tun'd too sharp in sweetness 
For the capacity of my ruder powers :
I fear it much ; and I do fear besides 
That I shall lose distinction in my joys ;
As doth a battle , when they charge on heaps 
The enemy flying .


She's making her ready : she'll come straight : you must be witty now . She does so blush , and fetches her wind so short , as if she were frayed with a sprite : I'll fetch her . It is the prettiest villain : she fetches her breath as short as a new-ta'en sparrow .


Even such a passion doth embrace my bosom ;
My heart beats thicker than a fev'rous pulse ;
And all my powers do their bestowing lose ,
Like vassalage at unawares encountering 
The eye of majesty .


Come , come , what need you blush ? shame's a baby . Here she is now : swear the oaths now to her that you have sworn to me . What ! are you gone again ? you must be watched ere you be made tame , must you ? Come your ways , come your ways ; an you draw backward , we'll put you i' the fills . Why do you not speak to her ? Come , draw this curtain , and let's see your picture . Alas the day , how loath you are to offend day-light ! an 'twere dark , you'd close sooner . So , so ; rub on , and kiss the mistress . How now ! a kiss in fee-farm ! build there , carpenter ; the air is sweet . Nay , you shall fight your hearts out ere I part you . The falcon as the tercel , for all the ducks i' the river : go to , go to .

You have bereft me of all words , lady .

Words pay no debts , give her deeds ; but she'll bereave you of the deeds too if she call your activity in question . What ! billing again ? Here's 'In witness whereof the parties interchangeably' Come in , come in : I'll go get a fire .


Will you walk in , my lord ?

O Cressida ! how often have I wished me thus !

Wished , my lord ! The gods grant ,O my lord !

What should they grant ? what makes this pretty abruption ? What too curious dreg espies my sweet lady in the fountain of our love ?

More dregs than water , if my fears have eyes .

Fears make devils of cherubins ; they never see truly .

Blind fear , that seeing reason leads , finds safer footing than blind reason stumbling without fear : to fear the worst oft cures the worse .

O ! let my lady apprehend no fear : in all Cupid's pageant there is presented no monster .

Nor nothing monstrous neither ?

Nothing but our undertakings ; when we vow to weep seas , live in fire , eat rocks , tame tigers ; thinking it harder for our mistress to devise imposition enough than for us to undergo any difficulty imposed . This is the monstruosity in love , lady , that the will is infinite , and the execution confined ; that the desire is boundless , and the act a slave to limit .

They say all lovers swear more performance than they are able , and yet reserve an ability that they never perform ; vowing more than the perfection of ten and discharging less than the tenth part of one . They that have the voice of lions and the act of hares , are they not monsters ?

Are there such ? such are not we . Praise us as we are tasted , allow us as we prove ; our head shall go bare , till merit crown it . No perfection in reversion shall have a praise in present : we will not name desert before his birth , and , being born , his addition shall be humble . Few words to fair faith : Troilus shall be such to Cressid , as what envy can say worst shall be a mock for his truth ; and what truth can speak truest not truer than Troilus .

Will you walk in , my lord ?


What ! blushing still ? have you not done talking yet ?

Well , uncle , what folly I commit , I dedicate to you .

I thank you for that : if my lord get a boy of you , you'll give him me . Be true to my lord ; if he flinch , chide me for it .

You know now your hostages ; your uncle's word , and my firm faith .

Nay , I'll give my word for her too . Our kindred , though they be long ere they are wooed , they are constant being won : they are burrs , I can tell you ; they'll stick where they are thrown .

Boldness comes to me now , and brings me heart :
Prince Troilus , I have lov'd you night and day 
For many weary months .

Why was my Cressid then so hard to win ?

Hard to seem won ; but I was won , my lord ,
With the first glance that ever pardon me 
If I confess much you will play the tyrant .
I love you now ; but , till now , not so much 
But I might master it : in faith , I lie ;
My thoughts were like unbridled children , grown 
Too headstrong for their mother . See , we fools !
Why have I blabb'd ? who shall be true to us 
When we are so unsecret to ourselves ?
But , though I lov'd you well , I woo'd you not ;
And yet , good faith , I wish'd myself a man ,
Or that we women had men's privilege 
Of speaking first . Sweet , bid me hold my tongue ;
For in this rapture I shall surely speak 
The thing I shall repent . See , see ! your silence ,
Cunning in dumbness , from my weakness draws 
My very soul of counsel . Stop my mouth .

And shall , albeit sweet music issues thence .

Pretty , i' faith .

My lord , I do beseech you , pardon me ;
'Twas not my purpose thus to beg a kiss :
I am asham'd : O heavens ! what have I done ?
For this time will I take my leave , my lord .

Your leave , sweet Cressid ?

Leave ! an you take leave till to-morrow morning ,

Pray you , content you .

What offends you , lady ?

Sir , mine own company .

You cannot shun yourself .

Let me go and try :
I have a kind of self resides with you ;
But an unkind self , that itself will leave ,
To be another's fool . I would be gone :
Where is my wit ? I speak I know not what .

Well know they what they speak that speak so wisely .

Perchance , my lord , I show more craft than love ;
And fell so roundly to a large confession ,
To angle for your thoughts : but you are wise ,
Or else you love not , for to be wise , and love ,
Exceeds man's might ; that dwells with gods above .

O ! that I thought it could be in a woman 
As if it can I will presume in you 
To feed for aye her lamp and flames of love ;
To keep her constancy in plight and youth ,
Outliving beauty's outward , with a mind 
That doth renew swifter than blood decays :
Or that persuasion could but thus convince me ,
That my integrity and truth to you 
Might be affronted with the match and weight 
Of such a winnow'd purity in love ;
How were I then uplifted ! but , alas !
I am as true as truth's simplicity ,
And simpler than the infancy of truth .

In that I'll war with you .

O virtuous fight !
When right with right wars who shall be most right .
True swains in love shall in the world to come 
Approve their truths by Troilus : when their rimes ,
Full of protest , of oath , and big compare ,
Want similes , truth tir'd with iteration ,
As true as steel , as plantage to the moon ,
As sun to day , as turtle to her mate ,
As iron to adamant , as earth to the centre ,
Yet , after all comparisons of truth ,
As truth's authentic author to be cited ,
'As true as Troilus' shall crown up the verse 
And sanctify the numbers .

Prophet may you be !
If I be false , or swerve a hair from truth ,
When time is old and hath forgot itself ,
When waterdrops have worn the stones of Troy ,
And blind oblivion swallow'd cities up ,
And mighty states characterless are grated 
To dusty nothing , yet let memory ,
From false to false , among false maids in love 
Upbraid my falsehood ! when they have said 'as false 
As air , as water , wind , or sandy earth ,
As fox to lamb , as wolf to heifer's calf ,
Pard to the hind , or stepdame to her son ;' 
Yea , let them say , to stick the heart of falsehood ,
'As false as Cressid .' 

Go to , a bargain made ; seal it , seal it : I'll be the witness . Here I hold your hand , here my cousin's . If ever you prove false one to another , since I have taken such pains to bring you together , let all pitiful goers-between be called to the world's end after my name ; call them all Pandars ; let all constant men be Troiluses , all false women Cressids , and all brokers-between Pandars ! say , Amen .

Amen .

Amen .

Amen . Whereupon I will show you a chamber and a bed ; which bed , because it shall not speak of your pretty encounters , press it to death : away !
And Cupid grant all tongue-tied maidens here 
Bed , chamber , Pandar to provide this gear !


Now , princes , for the service I have done you ,
The advantage of the time prompts me aloud 
To call for recompense . Appear it to your mind 
That through the sight I bear in things to come ,
I have abandon'd Troy , left my possession ,
Incurr'd a traitor's name ; expos'd myself ,
From certain and possess'd conveniences ,
To doubtful fortunes ; sequestering from me all 
That time , acquaintance , custom , and condition 
Made tame and most familiar to my nature ;
And here , to do you service , have become 
As new into the world , strange , unacquainted :
I do beseech you , as in way of taste ,
To give me now a little benefit ,
Out of those many register'd in promise ,
Which , you say , live to come in my behalf .

What wouldst thou of us , Trojan ? make demand .

You have a Trojan prisoner , call'd Antenor ,
Yesterday took : Troy holds him very dear .
Oft have you often have you thanks therefore 
Desir'd my Cressid in right great exchange ,
Whom Troy hath still denied ; but this Antenor 
I know is such a wrest in their affairs 
That their negociations all must slack ,
Wanting his manage ; and they will almost 
Give us a prince of blood , a son of Priam ,
In change of him : let him be sent , great princes ,
And he shall buy my daughter ; and her presence 
Shall quite strike off all service I have done ,
In most accepted pain .

Let Diomedes bear him ,
And bring us Cressid hither : Calchas shall have 
What he requests of us . Good Diomed ,
Furnish you fairly for this interchange :
Withal bring word if Hector will to-morrow 
Be answer'd in his challenge : Ajax is ready .

This shall I undertake ; and 'tis a burden 
Which I am proud to bear .

Achilles stands in the entrance of his tent :
Please it our general to pass strangely by him ,
As if he were forgot ; and , princes all ,
Lay negligent and loose regard upon him :
I will come last . 'Tis like he'll question me 
Why such unplausive eyes are bent on him :
If so , I have derision med'cinable 
To use between your strangeness and his pride ,
Which his own will shall have desire to drink .
It may do good : pride hath no other glass 
To show itself but pride , for supple knees 
Feed arrogance and are the poor man's fees .

We'll execute your purpose , and put on 
A form of strangeness as we pass along :
So do each lord , and either greet him not ,
Or else disdainfully , which shall shake him more 
Than if not look'd on . I will lead the way .

What ! comes the general to speak with me ?
You know my mind ; I'll fight no more 'gainst Troy .

What says Achilles ? would he aught with us ?

Would you , my lord , aught with the general ?

No .

Nothing , my lord .

The better .


Good day , good day .

How do you ? how do you ?


What ! does the cuckold scorn me ?

How now , Patroclus ?

Good morrow , Ajax .

Ha ?

Good morrow .

Ay , and good next day too .


What mean these fellows ? Know they not Achilles ?

They pass by strangely : they were us'd to bend ,
To send their smiles before them to Achilles ;
To come as humbly as they us'd to creep 
To holy altars .

What ! am I poor of late ?
'Tis certain , greatness , once fall'n out with fortune ,
Must fall out with men too : what the declin'd is 
He shall as soon read in the eyes of others 
As feel in his own fall ; for men , like butterflies ,
Show not their mealy wings but to the summer ,
And not a man , for being simply man ,
Hath any honour , but honour for those honours 
That are without him , as places , riches , and favour ,
Prizes of accident as oft as merit :
Which when they fall , as being slippery standers ,
The love that lean'd on them as slippery too ,
Do one pluck down another , and together 
Die in the fall . But 'tis not so with me :
Fortune and I are friends : I do enjoy 
At ample point all that I did possess ,
Save these men's looks ; who do , methinks , find out 
Something not worth in me such rich beholding 
As they have often given . Here is Ulysses :
I'll interrupt his reading .
How now , Ulysses !

Now , great Thetis' son !

What are you reading ?

A strange fellow here 
Writes me ,
That man , how dearly ever parted ,
How much in having , or without or in ,
Cannot make boast to have that which he hath ,
Nor feels not what he owes but by reflection ;
As when his virtues shining upon others 
Heat them , and they retort that heat again 
To the first giver .

This is not strange , Ulysses !
The beauty that is borne here in the face 
The bearer knows not , but commends itself 
To others' eyes : nor doth the eye itself 
That most pure spirit of sense behold itself ,
Not going from itself ; but eye to eye oppos'd 
Salutes each other with each other's form ;
For speculation turns not to itself 
Till it hath travell'd and is mirror'd there 
Where it may see itself . This is not strange at all .

I do not strain at the position ,
It is familiar , but at the author s drift ;
Who in his circumstance expressly proves 
That no man is the lord of any thing 
Though in and of him there be much consisting 
Till he communicate his parts to others :
Nor doth he of himself know them for aught 
Till he behold them form'd in the applause 
Where they're extended ; who , like an arch , reverberates 
The voice again , or , like a gate of steel 
Fronting the sun , receives and renders back 
His figure and his heat . I was much rapt in this ;
And apprehended here immediately 
The unknown Ajax .
Heavens , what a man is there ! a very horse ,
That has he knows not what . Nature , what things there are ,
Most abject in regard , and dear in use !
What things again most dear in the esteem 
And poor in worth ! Now shall we see to-morrow ,
An act that very chance doth throw upon him ,
Ajax renown'd . O heavens ! what some men do ;
While some men leave to do .
How some men creep in skittish Fortune's hall ,
Whiles others play the idiots in her eyes !
How one man eats into another's pride ,
While pride is fasting in his wantonness !
To see these Grecian lords ! why , even already 
They clap the lubber Ajax on the shoulder ,
As if his foot were on brave Hector's breast ,
And great Troy shrinking .

I do believe it ; for they pass'd by me 
As misers do by beggars , neither gave to me 
Good word or look : what ! are my deeds forgot ?

Time hath , my lord , a wallet at his back ,
Wherein he puts alms for oblivion ,
A great-siz'd monster of ingratitudes :
Those scraps are good deeds past ; which are devour'd 
As fast as they are made , forgot as soon 
As done : perseverance , dear my lord ,
Keeps honour bright : to have done , is to hang 
Quite out of fashion , like a rusty mail 
In monumental mockery . Take the instant way ;
For honour travels in a strait so narrow 
Where one but goes abreast : keep , then , the path ;
For emulation hath a thousand sons 
That one by one pursue : if you give way ,
Or hedge aside from the direct forthright ,
Like to an enter'd tide they all rush by 
And leave you hindmost ;
Or , like a gallant horse fall'n in first rank ,
Lie there for pavement to the abject rear ,
O'errun and trampled on : then what they do in present ,
Though less than yours in past , must o'ertop yours ;
For time is like a fashionable host ,
That slightly shakes his parting guest by the hand ,
And with his arms outstretch'd , as he would fly ,
Grasps in the comer : welcome ever smiles ,
And farewell goes out sighing . O ! let not virtue seek 
Remuneration for the thing it was ;
For beauty , wit ,
High birth , vigour of bone , desert in service ,
Love , friendship , charity , are subjects all 
To envious and calumniating time .
One touch of nature makes the whole world kin ,
That all with one consent praise new-born gawds ,
Though they are made and moulded of things past ,
And give to dust that is a little gilt 
More laud than gilt o'er-dusted .
The present eye praises the present object :
Then marvel not , thou great and complete man ,
That all the Greeks begin to worship Ajax ;
Since things in motion sooner catch the eye 
Than what not stirs . The cry went once on thee ,
And still it might , and yet it may again ,
If thou wouldst not entomb thyself alive ,
And case thy reputation in thy tent ;
Whose glorious deeds , but in these fields of late ,
Made emulous missions 'mongst the gods themselves ,
And drave great Mars to faction .

Of this my privacy 
I have strong reasons .

But 'gainst your privacy 
The reasons are more potent and heroical .
'Tis known , Achilles , that you are in love 
With one of Priam's daughters .

Ha ! known !

Is that a wonder ?
The providence that's in a watchful state 
Knows almost every grain of Plutus' gold ,
Finds bottom in the uncomprehensive deeps ,
Keeps place with thought , and almost , like the gods ,
Does thoughts unveil in their dumb cradles .
There is a mystery with whom relation 
Durst never meddle in the soul of state ,
Which hath an operation more divine 
Than breath or pen can give expressure to .
All the commerce that you have had with Troy 
As perfectly is ours as yours , my lord ;
And better would it fit Achilles much 
To throw down Hector than Polyxena ;
But it must grieve young Pyrrhus now at home ,
When fame shall in our islands sound her trump ,
And all the Greekish girls shall tripping sing ,
'Great Hector's sister did Achilles win ,
But our great Ajax bravely beat down him .' 
Farewell , my lord : I as your lover speak ;
The fool slides o'er the ice that you should break .


To this effect , Achilles , have I mov'd you .
A woman impudent and mannish grown 
Is not more loath'd than an effeminate man 
In time of action . I stand condemn'd for this :
They think my little stomach to the war 
And your great love to me restrains you thus .
Sweet , rouse yourself ; and the weak wanton Cupid 
Shall from your neck unloose his amorous fold ,
And , like a dew-drop from the lion's mane ,
Be shook to air .

Shall Ajax fight with Hector ?

Ay ; and perhaps receive much honour by him .

I see my reputation is at stake ;
My fame is shrewdly gor'd .

O ! then , beware ;
Those wounds heal ill that men do give themselves :
Omission to do what is necessary 
Seals a commission to a blank of danger ;
And danger , like an ague , subtly taints 
Even then when we sit idly in the sun .

Go call Thersites hither , sweet Patroclus :
I'll send the fool to Ajax and desire him 
T' invite the Trojan lords after the combat 
To see us here unarmed . I have a woman's longing ,
An appetite that I am sick withal ,
To see great Hector in his weeds of peace ;
To talk with him and to behold his visage ,
Even to my full of view . A labour sav'd !


A wonder !

What ?

Ajax goes up and down the field , asking for himself .

How so ?

He must fight singly to-morrow with Hector , and is so prophetically proud of an heroical cudgelling that he raves in saying nothing .

How can that be ?

Why , he stalks up and down like a peacock , a stride and a stand ; ruminates like a hostess that hath no arithmetic but her brain to set down her reckoning ; bites his lip with a politic regard , as who should say 'There were wit in this head , an 'twould out ;' and so there is , but it lies as coldly in him as fire in a flint , which will not show without knocking . The man's undone for ever ; for if Hector break not his neck i' the combat , he'll break't himself in vainglory . He knows not me : I said , 'Good morrow , Ajax ;' and he replies , 'Thanks , Agamemnon .' What think you of this man that takes me for the general ? He's grown a very land-fish , languageless , a monster . A plague of opinion ! a man may wear it on both sides , like a leather jerkin .

Thou must be my ambassador to him , Thersites .

Who , I ? why , he'll answer nobody ; he professes not answering ; speaking is for beggars ; he wears his tongue in his arms . I will put on his presence : let Patroclus make demands to me , you shall see the pageant of Ajax .

To him , Patroclus : tell him , I humbly desire the valiant Ajax to invite the most valorous Hector to come unarmed to my tent ; and to procure safe-conduct for his person of the magnanimous and most illustrious , six-or-seven-times-honoured captain-general of the Grecian army , Agamemnon , et c tera . Do this .

Jove bless great Ajax !

Hum !

I come from the worthy Achilles ,

Ha !

Who most humbly desires you to invite Hector to his tent ,

Hum !

And to procure safe-conduct from Agamemnon .

Agamemnon !

Ay , my lord .

Ha !

What say you to't ?

God be wi' you , with all my heart .

Your answer , sir .

If to-morrow be a fair day , by eleven o'clock it will go one way or other ; howsoever , he shall pay for me ere he has me .

Your answer , sir .

Fare you well , with all my heart .

Why , but he is not in this tune , is he ?

No , but he's out o' tune thus . What music will be in him when Hector has knocked out his brains , I know not ; but , I am sure , none , unless the fiddler Apollo get his sinews to make catlings on .

Come , thou shalt bear a letter to him straight .

Let me bear another to his horse , for that's the more capable creature .

My mind is troubled , like a fountain stirr'd ;
And I myself see not the bottom of it .


Would the fountain of your mind were clear again , that I might water an ass at it ! I had rather be a tick in a sheep than such a valiant ignorance .

See , ho ! who is that there ?

It is the Lord  neas .

Is the prince there in person ?
Had I so good occasion to lie long 
As you , Prince Paris , nothing but heavenly business 
Should rob my bed-mate of my company .

That's my mind too . Good morrow , Lord  neas .

A valiant Greek ,  neas ; take his hand :
Witness the process of your speech , wherein 
You told how Diomed , a whole week by days ,
Did haunt you in the field .

Health to you , valiant sir ,
During all question of the gentle truce ;
But when I meet you arm'd , as black defiance 
As heart can think or courage execute .

The one and other Diomed embraces .
Our bloods are now in calm , and , so long , health !
But when contention and occasion meet ,
By Jove , I'll play the hunter for thy life 
With all my force , pursuit , and policy .

And thou shalt hunt a lion , that will fly 
With his face backward . In humane gentleness ,
Welcome to Troy ! now , by Anchises' life ,
Welcome , indeed ! By Venus' hand I swear ,
No man alive can love in such a sort 
The thing he means to kill more excellently .

We sympathize . Jove , let  neas live ,
If to my sword his fate be not the glory ,
A thousand complete courses of the sun !
But , in mine emulous honour , let him die ,
With every joint a wound , and that to-morrow !

We know each other well .

We do ; and long to know each other worse .

This is the most despiteful gentle greeting ,
The noblest hateful love , that e'er I heard of .
What business , lord , so early ?

I was sent for to the king ; but why , I know not .

His purpose meets you : 'twas to bring this Greek 
To Calchas' house , and there to render him ,
For the enfreed Antenor , the fair Cressid .
Let's have your company ; or , if you please ,
Haste there before us . I constantly do think 
Or rather , call my thought a certain knowledge 
My brother Troilus lodges there to-night :
Rouse him and give him note of our approach ,
With the whole quality wherefore : I fear 
We shall be much unwelcome .

That I assure you :
Troilus had rather Troy were borne to Greece 
Than Cressid borne from Troy .

There is no help ;
The bitter disposition of the time 
Will have it so . On , lord ; we'll follow you .

Good morrow , all .


And tell me , noble Diomed ; faith , tell me true ,
Even in the soul of sound good-fellowship ,
Who , in your thoughts , merits fair Helen best 
Myself or Menelaus ?

Both alike :
He merits well to have her that doth seek her 
Not making any scruple of her soilure 
With such a hell of pain and world of charge ,
And you as well to keep her that defend her 
Not palating the taste of her dishonour 
With such a costly loss of wealth and friends :
He , like a puling cuckold , would drink up 
The lees and dregs of a flat tamed piece ;
You , like a lecher , out of whorish loins 
Are pleas'd to breed out your inheritors :
Both merits pois'd , each weighs nor less nor more ;
But he as he , the heavier for a whore .

You are too bitter to your country-woman .

She's bitter to her country . Hear me , Paris :
For every false drop in her bawdy veins 
A Grecian's life hath sunk ; for every scruple 
Of her contaminated carrion weight 
A Trojan hath been slain . Since she could speak ,
She hath not given so many good words breath 
As for her Greeks and Trojans suffer'd death .

Fair Diomed , you do as chapmen do ,
Dispraise the thing that you desire to buy ;
But we in silence hold this virtue well ,
We'll not commend what we intend to sell .
Here lies our way .


Dear , trouble not yourself : the morn is cold .

Then , sweet my lord , I'll call mine uncle down :
He shall unbolt the gates .

Trouble him not ;
To bed , to bed : sleep kill those pretty eyes ,
And give as soft attachment to thy senses 
As infants' empty of all thought !

Good morrow then .

I prithee now , to bed .

Are you aweary of me ?

O Cressida ! but that the busy day ,
Wak'd by the lark , hath rous'd the ribald crows ,
And dreaming night will hide our joys no longer ,
I would not from thee .

Night hath been too brief .

Beshrew the witch ! with venomous wights she stays 
As tediously as hell , but flies the grasps of love 
With wings more momentary-swift than thought .
You will catch cold , and curse me .

Prithee , tarry :
You men will never tarry .
O foolish Cressid ! I might have still held off ,
And then you would have tarried . Hark ! there's one up .

What ! are all the doors open here ?

It is your uncle .

A pestilence on him ! now will he be mocking : I shall have such a life !


How now , how now ! how go maiden-heads ?
Here , you maid ! where's my cousin Cressid ?

Go hang yourself , you naughty mocking uncle !
You bring me to do and then you flout me too .

To do what ? to do what ? let her say what : what have I brought you to do ?

Come , come ; beshrew your heart ! you'll ne'er be good ,
Nor suffer others .

Ha , ha ! Alas , poor wretch ! a poor capocchia ! hast not slept to-night ? would he not , a naughty man , let it sleep ? a bugbear take him !

Did not I tell you ? 'would he were knock'd o' the head !

Who's that at door ? good uncle , go and see .
My lord , come you again into my chamber :
You smile , and mock me , as if I meant naughtily .

Ha , ha !

Come , you are deceiv'd , I think of no such thing .

How earnestly they knock ! Pray you , come in :
I would not for half Troy have you seen here .


Who's there ? what's the matter ? will you beat down the door ? How now ! what's the matter ?


Good morrow , lord , good morrow .

Who's there ? my Lord  neas ! By my troth ,
I knew you not : what news with you so early ?

Is not Prince Troilus here ?

Here ! what should he do here ?

Come , he is here , my lord : do not deny him : it doth import him much to speak with me .

Is he here , say you ? 'tis more than I know , I'll be sworn : for my own part , I came in late . What should he do here ?

Who ! nay , then : come , come , you'll do him wrong ere you're 'ware . You'll be so true to him , to be false to him . Do not you know of him , but yet go fetch him hither ; go .


How now ! what's the matter ?

My lord , I scarce have leisure to salute you ,
My matter is so rash : there is at hand 
Paris your brother , and Deiphobus ,
The Grecian Diomed , and our Antenor 
Deliver'd to us ; and for him forthwith ,
Ere the first sacrifice , within this hour ,
We must give up to Diomedes' hand 
The Lady Cressida .

Is it so concluded ?

By Priam , and the general state of Troy :
They are at hand and ready to effect it .

How my achievements mock me !
I will go meet them : and , my Lord  neas ,
We met by chance ; you did not find me here .

Good , good , my lord ; the secrets of nature 
Have not more gift in taciturnity .


Is't possible ? no sooner got but lost ?
The devil take Antenor ! the young prince will go mad : a plague upon Antenor ! I would they had broke's neck !


How now ! What is the matter ? Who was here ?

Ah ! ah !

Why sigh you so profoundly ? where's my lord ? gone ! Tell me , sweet uncle , what's the matter ?

Would I were as deep under the earth as I am above !

O the gods ! what's the matter ?

Prithee , get thee in . Would thou hadst ne'er been born ! I knew thou wouldst be his death . O poor gentleman ! A plague upon Antenor !

Good uncle , I beseech you , on my knees I beseech you , what's the matter ?

Thou must be gone , wench , thou must be gone ; thou art changed for Antenor . Thou must to thy father , and be gone from Troilus : 'twill be his death ; 'twill be his bane ; he cannot bear it .

O you immortal gods ! I will not go .

Thou must .

I will not , uncle : I have forgot my father ;
I know no touch of consanguinity ;
No kin , no love , no blood , no soul so near me 
As the sweet Troilus . O you gods divine !
Make Cressid's name the very crown of falsehood 
If ever she leave Troilus ! Time , force , and death ,
Do to this body what extremes you can ;
But the strong base and building of my love 
Is as the very centre of the earth ,
Drawing all things to it . I'll go in and weep ,

Do , do .

Tear my bright hair , and scratch my praised cheeks ,
Crack my clear voice with sobs , and break my heart 
With sounding Troilus . I will not go from Troy .


It is great morning , and the hour prefix'd 
Of her delivery to this valiant Greek 
Comes fast upon . Good my brother Troilus ,
Tell you the lady what she is to do ,
And haste her to the purpose .

Walk into her house ;
I'll bring her to the Grecian presently :
And to his hand when I deliver her ,
Think it an altar , and thy brother Troilus 
A priest , there offering to it his own heart .


I know what 'tis to love ;
And would , as I shall pity , I could help !
Please you walk in , my lords .


Be moderate , be moderate .

Why tell you me of moderation ?
The grief is fine , full , perfect , that I taste ,
And violenteth in a sense as strong 
As that which causeth it : how can I moderate it ?
If I could temporize with my affection ,
Or brew it to a weak and colder palate ,
The like allayment could I give my grief :
My love admits no qualifying dross ;
No more my grief , in such a precious loss .


Here , here , here he comes . Ah ! sweet ducks .

O Troilus ! Troilus !

What a pair of spectacles is here ! Let me embrace too . 'O heart ,' as the goodly saying is ,

O heart , heavy heart ,
Why sigh'st thou without breaking ?

when he answers again ,

Because thou canst not ease thy smart 
By friendship nor by speaking .

There was never a truer rime . Let us cast away nothing , for we may live to have need of such a verse : we see it , we see it . How now , lambs !

Cressid , I love thee in so strain'd a purity ,
That the bless'd gods , as angry with my fancy ,
More bright in zeal than the devotion which 
Cold lips blow to their deities , take thee from me .

Have the gods envy ?

Ay , ay , ay , ay ; 'tis too plain a case .

And is it true that I must go from Troy ?

A hateful truth .

What ! and from Troilus too ?

From Troy and Troilus .

Is it possible ?

And suddenly ; where injury of chance 
Puts back leave-taking , justles roughly by 
All time of pause , rudely beguiles our lips 
Of all rejoindure , forcibly prevents 
Our lock'd embrasures , strangles our dear vows 
Even in the birth of our own labouring breath .
We two , that with so many thousand sighs 
Did buy each other , must poorly sell ourselves 
With the rude brevity and discharge of one .
Injurious time now with a robber's haste 
Crams his rich thievery up , he knows not how :
As many farewells as be stars in heaven ,
With distinct breath and consign'd kisses to them ,
He fumbles up into a loose adieu ,
And scants us with a single famish'd kiss ,
Distasted with the salt of broken tears .

My lord , is the lady ready ?

Hark ! you are call'd : some say the Genius so 
Cries 'Come !' to him that instantly must die .
Bid them have patience ; she shall come anon .

Where are my tears ? rain , to lay this wind , or my heart will be blown up by the root !


I must then to the Grecians ?

No remedy .

A woeful Cressid 'mongst the merry Greeks !
When shall we see again ?

Hear me , my love . Be thou but true of heart ,

I true ! how now ! what wicked deem is this ?

Nay , we must use expostulation kindly ,
For it is parting from us :
I speak not 'be thou true ,' as fearing thee ,
For I will throw my glove to Death himself ,
That there's no maculation in thy heart ;
But , 'be thou true ,' say I , to fashion in 
My sequent protestation ; be thou true ,
And I will see thee .

O ! you shall be expos'd , my lord , to dangers 
As infinite as imminent ; but I'll be true .

And I'll grow friend with danger . Wear this sleeve .

And you this glove . When shall I see you ?

I will corrupt the Grecian sentinels ,
To give thee nightly visitation .
But yet , be true .

O heavens ! 'be true' again !

Hear why I speak it , love :
The Grecian youths are full of quality ;
They're loving , well compos'd , with gifts of nature ,
Flowing and swelling o'er with arts and exercise :
How novelty may move , and parts with person ,
Alas ! a kind of godly jealousy ,
Which , I beseech you , call a virtuous sin ,
Makes me afear'd .

O heavens ! you love me not .

Die I a villain , then !
In this I do not call your faith in question 
So mainly as my merit : I cannot sing ,
Nor heel the high lavolt , nor sweeten talk ,
Nor play at subtle games ; fair virtues all ,
To which the Grecians are most prompt and pregnant :
But I can tell that in each grace of these 
There lurks a still and dumb-discoursive devil 
That tempts most cunningly . But be not tempted .

Do you think I will ?

No .
But something may be done that we will not :
And sometimes we are devils to ourselves 
When we will tempt the frailty of our powers ,
Presuming on their changeful potency .

Nay , good my lord ,

Come , kiss ; and let us part .

Brother Troilus !

Good brother , come you hither ;
And bring  neas and the Grecian with you .

My lord , will you be true ?

Who , I ? alas , it is my vice , my fault :
While others fish with craft for great opinion ,
I with great truth catch mere simplicity ;
Whilst some with cunning gild their copper crowns ,
With truth and plainness I do wear mine bare .
Fear not my truth ; the moral of my wit 
Is plain , and true ; there's all the reach of it .


Welcome , Sir Diomed ! Here is the lady 
Which for Antenor we deliver you :
At the port , lord , I'll give her to thy hand ,
And by the way possess thee what she is .
Entreat her fair ; and , by my soul , fair Greek ,
If e'er thou stand at mercy of my sword ,
Name Cressid , and thy life shall be as safe 

As Priam is in Ilion .

Fair Lady Cressid ,
So please you , save the thanks this prince expects :
The lustre in your eye , heaven in your cheek ,
Pleads your fair usage ; and to Diomed 
You shall be mistress , and command him wholly .

Grecian , thou dost not use me courteously ,
To shame the zeal of my petition to thee 
In praising her : I tell thee , lord of Greece ,
She is as far high-soaring o'er thy praises 
As thou unworthy to be call'd her servant .
I charge thee use her well , even for my charge ;
For , by the dreadful Pluto , if thou dost not ,
Though the great bulk Achilles be thy guard ,
I'll cut thy throat .

O ! be not mov'd , Prince Troilus :
Let me be privileg'd by my place and message 
To be a speaker free ; when I am hence ,
I'll answer to my lust ; and know you , lord ,
I'll nothing do on charge : to her own worth 
She shall be priz'd ; but that you say 'be't so ,' 
I'll speak it in my spirit and honour , 'no .' 

Come , to the port . I'll tell thee , Diomed ,
This brave shall oft make thee to hide thy head .
Lady , give me your hand , and , as you walk ,
To our own selves bend we our needful talk .


Hark ! Hector's trumpet .

How have we spent this morning !
The prince must think me tardy and remiss ,
That swore to ride before him to the field .

'Tis Troilus' fault . Come , come , to field with him .

Let us make ready straight .

Yea , with a bridegroom's fresh alacrity ,
Let us address to tend on Hector's heels :
The glory of our Troy doth this day lie 
On his fair worth and single chivalry .


Here art thou in appointment fresh and fair ,
Anticipating time with starting courage .
Give with thy trumpet a loud note to Troy ,
Thou dreadful Ajax ; that the appalled air 
May pierce the head of the great combatant 
And hale him hither .

Thou , trumpet , there's my purse .
Now crack thy lungs , and split thy brazen pipe :
Blow , villain , till thy sphered bias cheek 
Outswell the colic of puff'd Aquilon .
Come , stretch thy chest , and let thy eyes spout blood ;
Thou blow'st for Hector .


No trumpet answers .

'Tis but early days .

Is not yond Diomed with Calchas' daughter ?

'Tis he , I ken the manner of his gait ;
He rises on the toe : that spirit of his 
In aspiration lifts him from the earth .


Is this the Lady Cressid ?

Even she .

Most dearly welcome to the Greeks , sweet lady .

Our general doth salute you with a kiss .

Yet is the kindness but particular ;
'Twere better she were kiss'd in general .

And very courtly counsel : I'll begin .
So much for Nestor .

I'll take that winter from your lips , fair lady :
Achilles bids you welcome .

I had good argument for kissing once .

But that's no argument for kissing now ;
For thus popp'd Paris in his hardiment ,
And parted thus you and your argument .

O , deadly gall , and theme of all our scorns !
For which we lose our heads to gild his horns .

The first was Menelaus' kiss ; this , mine :
Patroclus kisses you .

O ! this is trim .

Paris and I , kiss evermore for him .

I'll have my kiss , sir . Lady , by your leave .

In kissing , do you render or receive ?

Both take and give .

I'll make my match to live ,
The kiss you take is better than you give ;
Therefore no kiss .

I'll give you boot ; I'll give you three for one .

You're an odd man ; give even , or give none .

An odd man , lady ! every man is odd .

No , Paris is not ; for , you know 'tis true ,
That you are odd , and he is even with you .

You fillip me o' the head .

No , I'll be sworn .

It were no match , your nail against his horn .
May I , sweet lady , beg a kiss of you ?

You may .

I do desire it .

Why , beg , then .

Why , then , for Venus' sake , give me a kiss ,
When Helen is a maid again , and his .

I am your debtor ; claim it when 'tis due .

Never's my day , and then a kiss of you .

Lady , a word : I'll bring you to your father .


A woman of quick sense .

Fie , fie upon her !
There's language in her eye , her cheek , her lip ,
Nay , her foot speaks ; her wanton spirits look out 
At every joint and motive of her body .
O ! these encounterers , so glib of tongue ,
That give a coasting welcome ere it comes ,
And wide unclasp the tables of their thoughts 
To every tickling reader , set them down 
For sluttish spoils of opportunity 
And daughters of the game .


The Trojans' trumpet .

Yonder comes the troop .


Hail , all you state of Greece ! what shall be done 
To him that victory commands ? or do you purpose 
A victor shall be known ? will you the knights 
Shall to the edge of all extremity 
Pursue each other , or shall be divided 
By any voice or order of the field ?
Hector bade ask .

Which way would Hector have it ?

He cares not ; he'll obey conditions .

'Tis done like Hector ; but securely done ,
A little proudly , and great deal misprising 
The knight oppos'd .

If not Achilles , sir .
What is your name ?

If not Achilles , nothing .

Therefore Achilles ; but , whate'er , know this :
In the extremity of great and little ,
Valour and pride excel themselves in Hector ;
The one almost as infinite as all ,
The other blank as nothing . Weigh him well ,
And that which looks like pride is courtesy .
This Ajax is half made of Hector's blood :
In love whereof half Hector stays at home ;
Half heart , half hand , half Hector comes to seek 
This blended knight , half Trojan , and half Greek .

A maiden battle , then ? O ! I perceive you .


Here is Sir Diomed . Go , gentle knight ,
Stand by our Ajax : as you and Lord  neas 
Consent upon the order of their fight ,
So be it ; either to the uttermost ,
Or else a breath : the combatants being kin 
Half stints their strife before their strokes begin .


They are oppos'd already .

What Trojan is that same that looks so heavy ?

The youngest son of Priam , a true knight :
Not yet mature , yet matchless ; firm of word ,
Speaking in deeds and deedless in his tongue ;
Not soon provok'd , nor being provok'd soon calm'd :
His heart and hand both open and both free ;
For what he has he gives , what thinks he shows ;
Yet gives he not till judgment guide his bounty ,
Nor dignifies an impure thought with breath .
Manly as Hector , but more dangerous ;
For Hector , in his blaze of wrath , subscribes 
To tender objects ; but he in heat of action 
Is more vindicative than jealous love .
They call him Troilus , and on him erect 
A second hope , as fairly built as Hector .
Thus says  neas ; one that knows the youth 
Even to his inches , and with private soul 
Did in great Ilion thus translate him to me .


They are in action .

Now , Ajax , hold thine own !

Hector , thou sleep'st ; awake thee !

His blows are well dispos'd : there , Ajax !

You must no more .


Princes , enough , so please you .

I am not warm yet ; let us fight again .

As Hector pleases .

Why , then will I no more :
Thou art , great lord , my father's sister's son ,
A cousin-german to great Priam's seed ;
The obligation of our blood forbids 
A gory emulation 'twixt us twain .
Were thy commixtion Greek and Trojan so 
That thou couldst say , 'This hand is Grecian all ,
And this is Trojan ; the sinews of this leg 
All Greek , and this all Troy ; my mother's blood 
Runs on the dexter cheek , and this sinister 
Bounds in my father's ,' by Jove multipotent ,
Thou shouldst not bear from me a Greekish member 
Wherein my sword had not impressure made 
Of our rank feud . But the just gods gainsay 
That any drop thou borrow'dst from thy mother ,
My sacred aunt , should by my mortal sword 
Be drain'd ! Let me embrace thee , Ajax ;
By him that thunders , thou hast lusty arms ;
Hector would have them fall upon him thus :
Cousin , all honour to thee !

I thank thee , Hector :
Thou art too gentle and too free a man :
I came to kill thee , cousin , and bear hence 
A great addition earned in thy death .

Not Neoptolemus so mirable ,
On whose bright crest Fame with her loud'st byes 
Cries , 'This is he !' could promise to himself 
A thought of added honour torn from Hector .

There is expectance here from both the sides ,
What further you will do .

We'll answer it ;
The issue is embracement : Ajax , farewell .

If I might in entreaties find success ,
As seld I have the chance ,I would desire 
My famous cousin to our Grecian tents .

'Tis Agamemnon's wish , and great Achilles 
Doth long to see unarm'd the valiant Hector .

neas , call my brother Troilus to me ,
And signify this loving interview 
To the expecters of our Trojan part ;
Desire them home . Give me thy hand , my cousin ;
I will go eat with thee and see your knights .

Great Agamemnon comes to meet us here .

The worthiest of them tell me name by name ;
But for Achilles , mine own searching eyes 
Shall find him by his large and portly size .

Worthy of arms ! as welcome as to one 
That would be rid of such an enemy ;
But that's no welcome ; understand more clear ,
What's past and what's to come is strew'd with husks 
And formless ruin of oblivion ;
But in this extant moment , faith and troth ,
Strain'd purely from all hollow bias-drawing ,
Bids thee , with most divine integrity ,
From heart of very heart , great Hector , welcome .

I thank thee , most imperious Agamemnon .

My well-fam'd Lord of Troy , no less to you .

Let me confirm my princely brother's greeting :
You brace of war-like brothers , welcome hither .

Whom must we answer ?

The noble Menelaus .

O ! you , my lord ? by Mars his gauntlet , thanks !
Mock not that I affect the untraded oath ;
Your quondam wife swears still by Venus' glove :
She's well , but bade me not commend her to you .

Name her not now , sir ; she's a deadly theme .

O ! pardon ; I offend .

I have , thou gallant Trojan , seen thee oft ,
Labouring for destiny , make cruel way 
Through ranks of Greekish youth : and I have seen thee ,
As hot as Perseus , spur thy Phrygian steed ,
Despising many forfeits and subduements ,
When thou hast hung thy advanc'd sword i' th' air ,
Not letting it decline on the declin'd ;
That I have said to some my standers-by ,
'Lo ! Jupiter is yonder , dealing life !' 
And I have seen thee pause and take thy breath ,
When that a ring of Greeks have hemm'd thee in ,
Like an Olympian wrestling : this have I seen ;
But this thy countenance , still lock'd in steel ,
I never saw till now . I knew thy grandsire ,
And once fought with him : he was a soldier good ;
But , by great Mars , the captain of us all ,
Never like thee . Let an old man embrace thee ;
And , worthy warrior , welcome to our tents .

'Tis the old Nestor .

Let me embrace thee , good old chronicle ,
That hast so long walk'd hand in hand with time :
Most reverend Nestor , I am glad to clasp thee .

I would my arms could match thee in contention ,
As they contend with thee in courtesy .

I would they could .

Ha !
By this white beard , I'd fight with thee to-morrow .
Well , welcome , welcome ! I have seen the time .

I wonder now how yonder city stands ,
When we have here her base and pillar by us .

I know your favour , Lord Ulysses , well .
Ah ! sir , there's many a Greek and Trojan dead ,
Since first I saw yourself and Diomed 
In Ilion , on your Greekish embassy .

Sir , I foretold you then what would ensue :
My prophecy is but half his journey yet ;
For yonder walls , that pertly front your town ,
Yond towers , whose wanton tops do buss the clouds ,
Must kiss their own feet .

I must not believe you :
There they stand yet , and modestly I think ,
The fall of every Phrygian stone will cost 
A drop of Grecian blood : the end crowns all ,
And that old common arbitrator , Time ,
Will one day end it .

So to him we leave it .
Most gentle and most valiant Hector , welcome .
After the general , I beseech you next 
To feast with me and see me at my tent .

I shall forestall thee , Lord Ulysses , thou !
Now , Hector , I have fed mine eyes on thee ;
I have with exact view perus'd thee , Hector ,
And quoted joint by joint .

Is this Achilles ?

I am Achilles .

Stand fair , I pray thee : let me look on thee .

Behold thy fill .

Nay , I have done already .

Thou art too brief : I will the second time ,
As I would buy thee , view thee limb by limb .

O ! like a book of sport thou'lt read me o'er ;
But there's more in me than thou understand'st .
Why dost thou so oppress me with thine eye ?

Tell me , you heavens , in which part of his body 
Shall I destroy him ? whether there , or there , or there ?
That I may give the local wound a name ,
And make distinct the very breach whereout 
Hector's great spirit flew . Answer me , heavens !

It would discredit the bless'd gods , proud man ,
To answer such a question . Stand again :
Think'st thou to catch my life so pleasantly 
As to prenominate in nice conjecture 
Where thou wilt hit me dead ?

I tell thee , yea .

Wert thou an oracle to tell me so ,
I'd not believe thee . Henceforth guard thee well ,
For I'll not kill thee there , nor there , nor there ;
But , by the forge that stithied Mars his helm ,
I'll kill thee every where , yea , o'er and o'er .
You wisest Grecians , pardon me this brag ;
His insolence draws folly from my lips ;
But I'll endeavour deeds to match these words ,
Or may I never 

Do not chafe thee , cousin :
And you , Achilles , let these threats alone ,
Till accident or purpose bring you to't :
You may have every day enough of Hector ,
If you have stomach . The general state , I fear ,
Can scarce entreat you to be odd with him .

I pray you , let us see you in the field ;
We have had pelting wars since you refus'd 
The Grecians' cause .

Dost thou entreat me , Hector ?
To-morrow do I meet thee , fell as death ;
To-night all friends .

Thy hand upon that match .

First , all you peers of Greece , go to my tent ;
There in the full convive we afterwards ,
As Hector's leisure and your bounties shall 
Concur together , severally entreat him .
Beat loud the tabourines , let the trumpets blow ,
That this great soldier may his welcome know .


My Lord Ulysses , tell me , I beseech you ,
In what place of the field doth Calchas keep ?

At Menelaus' tent , most princely Troilus :
There Diomed doth feast with him to-night ;
Who neither looks upon the heaven nor earth ,
But gives all gaze and bent of amorous view 
On the fair Cressid .

Shall I , sweet lord , be bound to thee so much ,
After we part from Agamemnon's tent ,
To bring me thither ?

You shall command me , sir .
As gentle tell me , of what honour was 
This Cressida in Troy ? Had she no lover there 
That wails her absence ?

O , sir ! to such as boasting show their scars 
A mock is due . Will you walk on , my lord ?
She was belov'd , she lov'd ; she is , and doth :
But still sweet love is food for fortune's tooth .


I'll heat his blood with Greekish wine to-night ,
Which with my scimitar I'll cool to-morrow .
Patroclus , let us feast him to the height .

Here comes Thersites .


How now , thou core of envy !
Thou crusty batch of nature , what's the news ?

Why , thou picture of what thou seemest , and idol of idiot-worshippers , here's a letter for thee .

From whence , fragment ?

Why , thou full dish of fool , from Troy .

Who keeps the tent now ?

The surgeon's box , or the patient's wound .

Well said , adversity ! and what need these tricks ?

Prithee , be silent , boy : I profit not by thy talk : thou art thought to be Achilles' male varlet .

Male varlet , you rogue ! what's that ?

Why , his masculine whore . Now , the rotten diseases of the south , the guts-griping , ruptures , catarrhs , loads o' gravel i' the back , lethargies , cold palsies , raw eyes , dirt-rotten livers , wheezing lungs , bladders full of imposthume , sciaticas , lime-kilns i' the palm , incurable bone-ache , and the rivelled fee-simple of the tetter , take and take again such preposterous discoveries !

Why , thou damnable box of envy , thou , what meanest thou to curse thus ?

Do I curse thee ?

Why , no , you ruinous butt , you whoreson indistinguishable cur , no .

No ! why art thou then exasperate , thou idle immaterial skein of sleave silk , thou green sarcenet flap for a sore eye , thou tassel of a prodigal's purse , thou ? Ah ! how the poor world is pestered with such water-flies , diminutives of nature .

Out , gall !

Finch egg !

My sweet Patroclus , I am thwarted quite 
From my great purpose in to-morrow's battle .
Here is a letter from Queen Hecuba ,
A token from her daughter , my fair love ,
Both taxing me and gaging me to keep 
An oath that I have sworn . I will not break it :
Fall Greeks ; fail fame ; honour or go or stay ;
My major vow lies here , this I'll obey .
Come , come , Thersites , help to trim my tent ;
This night in banqueting must all be spent .
Away , Patroclus !


With too much blood and too little brain , these two may run mad ; but if with too much brain , and too little blood they do , I'll be a curer of madmen . Here's Agamemnon , an honest fellow enough , and one that loves quails , but he has not so much brain as ear-wax : and the goodly transformation of Jupiter there , his brother , the bull , the primitive statue , and oblique memorial of cuckolds ; a thrifty shoeing-horn in a chain , hanging at his brother's leg , to what form but that he is should wit larded with malice and malice forced with wit turn him to ? To an ass , were nothing : he is both ass and ox ; to an ox , were nothing : he is both ox and ass . To be a dog , a mule , a cat , a fitchew , a toad , a lizard , an owl , a puttock , or a herring without a roe , I would not care ; but to be Menelaus ! I would conspire against destiny . Ask me not what I would be , if I were not Thersites , for I care not to be the louse of a lazar , so I were not Menelaus . Hey-day ! spirits and fires !


We go wrong , we go wrong .

No , yonder 'tis ;
There , where we see the lights .

I trouble you .

No , not a whit .

Here comes himself to guide you .


Welcome , brave Hector ; welcome , princes all .

So now , fair prince of Troy , I bid good-night .
Ajax commands the guard to tend on you .

Thanks and good-night to the Greeks' general .

Good-night , my lord .

Good-night , sweet Lord Menelaus .

Sweet draught : 'sweet ,' quoth a' ! sweet sink , sweet sewer .

Good-night and welcome both at once , to those 
That go or tarry .

Good-night .


Old Nestor tarries ; and you too , Diomed ,
Keep Hector company an hour or two .

I cannot , lord ; I have important business ,
The tide whereof is now . Good-night , great Hector .

Give me your hand .

Follow his torch ; he goes to Calchas' tent .
I'll keep you company .

Sweet sir , you honour me .

And so , good-night .


Come , come , enter my tent .


That same Diomed's a false-hearted rogue , a most unjust knave ; I will no more trust him when he leers than I will a serpent when he hisses . He will spend his mouth , and promise , like Brabbler the hound ; but when he performs , astronomers foretell it : it is prodigious , there will come some change : the sun borrows of the moon when Diomed keeps his word . I will rather leave to see Hector , than not to dog him : they say he keeps a Trojan drab , and uses the traitor Calchas' tent . I'll after . Nothing but lechery ! all incontinent varlets .


What , are you up here , ho ! speak .

Who calls ?

Diomed . Calchas , I think . Where's your daughter ?

She comes to you .


Stand where the torch may not discover us .


Cressid comes forth to him .

How now , my charge !

Now , my sweet guardian ! Hark ! a word with you .


Yea , so familiar !

She will sing any man at first sight .

And any man may sing her , if he can take her cliff ; she's noted .

Will you remember ?

Remember ! yes .

Nay , but do , then ;
And let your mind be coupled with your words .

What should she remember ?

List !

Sweet honey Greek , tempt me no more to folly .

Roguery !

Nay , then ,

I'll tell you what ,

Foh , foh ! come , tell a pin : you are forsworn .

In faith , I cannot . What would you have me do ?

A juggling trick ,to be secretly open .

What did you swear you would bestow on me ?

I prithee , do not hold me to mine oath ;
Bid me do anything but that , sweet Greek .

Good-night .

Hold , patience !

How now , Trojan ?

Diomed ,

No , no , good-night ; I'll be your fool no more .

Thy better must .

Hark ! one word in your ear .

O plague and madness !

You are mov'd , prince ; let us depart , I pray you ,
Lest your displeasure should enlarge itself 
To wrathful terms . This place is dangerous ;
The time right deadly . I beseech you , go .

Behold , I pray you !

Nay , good my lord , go off :
You flow to great distraction ; come , my lord .

I pray thee , stay .

You have not patience ; come .

I pray you , stay . By hell , and all hell's torments ,
I will not speak a word !

And so , good-night .

Nay , but you part in anger .

Doth that grieve thee ?
O wither'd truth !

Why , how now , lord !

By Jove ,
I will be patient .

Guardian !why , Greek !

Foh , foh ! adieu ; you palter .

In faith , I do not : come hither once again .

You shake , my lord , at something : will you go ?
You will break out .

She strokes his cheek !

Come , come .

Nay , stay ; by Jove , I will not speak a word :
There is between my will and all offences 
A guard of patience : stay a little while .

How the devil Luxury , with his fat rump and potato finger , tickles these together ! Fry , lechery , fry !

But will you , then ?

In faith , I will , la ; never trust me else .

Give me some token for the surety of it .

I'll fetch you one .


You have sworn patience .

Fear me not , sweet lord ;
I will not be myself , nor have cognition 
Of what I feel : I am all patience .


Now the pledge ! now , now , now !

Here , Diomed , keep this sleeve .

O beauty ! where is thy faith ?

My lord ,

I will be patient ; outwardly I will .

You look upon that sleeve ; behold it well .
He lov'd me O false wench !Give't to me again .

Whose was't ?

It is no matter , now I have't again .
I will not meet with you to-morrow night .
I prithee , Diomed , visit me no more .

Now she sharpens : well said , whetstone !

I shall have it .

What , this ?

Ay , that .

O ! all you gods . O pretty , pretty pledge !
Thy master now lies thinking in his bed 
Of thee and me ; and sighs , and takes my glove ,
And gives me norial dainty kisses to it ,
As I kiss thee . Nay , do not snatch it from me ;
He that takes that doth take my heart withal .

I had your heart before ; this follows it .

I did swear patience .

You shall not have it , Diomed ; faith you shall not ;
I'll give you something else .

I will have this . Whose was it ?

'Tis no matter .

Come , tell me whose it was .

'Twas one's that loved me better than you will .
But , now you have it , take it .

Whose was it ?

By all Diana's waiting-women yond ,
And by herself , I will not tell you whose .

To-morrow will I wear it on my helm ,
And grieve his spirit that dares not challenge it .

Wert thou the devil , and wor'st it on thy horn ,
It should be challeng'd .

Well , well , 'tis done , 'tis past : and yet it is not :
I will not keep my word .

Why then , farewell ;
Thou never shalt mock Diomed again .

You shall not go : one cannot speak a word ,
But it straight starts you .

I do not like this fooling .

Nor I , by Pluto : but that that likes not me 
Pleases me best .

What , shall I come ? the hour ?

Ay , come :O Jove !
Do come :I shall be plagu'd .

Farewell till then .

Good-night : I prithee , come .

Troilus , farewell ! one eye yet looks on thee ,
But with my heart the other eye doth see .
Ah ! poor our sex ; this fault in us I find ,
The error of our eye directs our mind .
What error leads must err . O ! then conclude 
Minds sway'd by eyes are full of turpitude .


A proof of strength she could not publish more ,
Unless she said , 'My mind is now turn'd whore .' 

All's done , my lord .

It is .

Why stay we , then ?

To make a recordation to my soul 
Of every syllable that here was spoke .
But if I tell how these two did co-act ,
Shall I not lie in publishing a truth ?
Sith yet there is a credence in my heart ,
An esperance so obstinately strong ,
That doth invert the attest of eyes and ears ,
As if those organs had deceptions functions ,
Created only to calumniate .
Was Cressid here ?

I cannot conjure , Trojan .

She was not , sure .

Most sure she was .

Why , my negation hath no taste of madness .

Nor mine , my lord : Cressid was here but now .

Let it not be believ'd for womanhood !
Think we had mothers ; do not give advantage 
To stubborn critics , apt , without a theme ,
For depravation , to square the general sex 
By Cressid's rule : rather think this not Cressid .

What hath she done , prince , that can soil our mothers ?

Nothing at all , unless that this were she .

Will he swagger himself out on's own eyes ?

This she ? no , this is Diomed's Cressida .
If beauty have a soul , this is not she ;
If souls guide vows , if vows be sanctimony ,
If sanctimony be the gods' delight ,
If there be rule in unity itself ,
This is not she . O madness of discourse ,
That cause sets up with and against itself ;
Bi-fold authority ! where reason can revolt 
Without perdition , and loss assume all reason 
Without revolt : this is , and is not , Cressid .
Within my soul there doth conduce a fight 
Of this strange nature that a thing inseparate 
Divides more wider than the sky and earth ;
And yet the spacious breadth of this division 
Admits no orifice for a point as subtle 
As Ariachne's broken woof to enter .
Instance , O instance ! strong as Pluto's gates ;
Cressid is mine , tied with the bonds of heaven :
Instance , O instance ! strong as heaven itself ;
The bonds of heaven are slipp'd , dissolv'd , and loos'd ;
And with another knot , five-finger-tied ,
The fractions of her faith , orts of her love ,
The fragments , scraps , the bits , and greasy reliques 
Of her o'er-eaten faith , are bound to Diomed .

May worthy Troilus be half attach'd 
With that which here his passion doth express ?

Ay , Greek ; and that shall be divulged well 
In characters as red as Mars his heart 
Inflam'd with Venus : never did young man fancy 
With so eternal and so fix'd a soul .
Hark , Greek : as much as I do Cressid love ,
So much by weight hate I her Diomed ;
That sleeve is mine that he'll bear on his helm ;
Were it a casque compos'd by Vulcan's skill ,
My sword should bite it . Not the dreadful spout 
Which shipmen do the hurricano call ,
Constring'd in mass by the almighty sun ,
Shall dizzy with more clamour Neptune's ear 
In his descent than shall my prompted sword 
Falling on Diomed .

He'll tickle it for his concupy .

O Cressid ! O false Cressid ! false , false , false !
Let all untruths stand by thy stained name ,
And they'll seem glorious .

O ! contain yourself ;
Your passion draws ears hither .


I have been seeking you this hour , my lord .
Hector , by this , is arming him in Troy :
Ajax , your guard , stays to conduct you home .

Have with you , prince . My courteous lord , adieu .
Farewell , revolted fair ! and Diomed ,
Stand fast , and wear a castle on thy head !

I'll bring you to the gates .

Accept distracted thanks .


Would I could meet that rogue Diomed ! I would croak like a raven ; I would bode , I would bode . Patroclus would give me any thing for the intelligence of this whore : the parrot will not do more for an almond than he for a commodious drab . Lechery , lechery ; still , wars and lechery : nothing else holds fashion . A burning devil take them !


When was my lord so much ungently temper'd ,
To stop his ears against admonishment ?
Unarm , unarm , and do not fight to-day .

You train me to offend you ; get you in :
By all the everlasting gods , I'll go .

My dreams will , sure , prove ominous to the day .

No more , I say .


Where is my brother Hector ?

Here , sister ; arm'd , and bloody in intent .
Consort with me in loud and dear petition ;
Pursue we him on knees ; for I have dream'd 
Of bloody turbulence , and this whole night 
Hath nothing been but shapes and forms of slaughter .

O ! 'tis true .

Ho ! bid my trumpet sound .

No notes of sally , for the heavens , sweet brother .

Be gone , I say : the gods have heard me swear .

The gods are deaf to hot and peevish vows :
They are polluted offerings , more abhorr'd 
Than spotted livers in the sacrifice .

O ! be persuaded : do not count it holy 
To hurt by being just : it is as lawful ,
For we would give much , to use violent thefts ,
And rob in the behalf of charity .

It is the purpose that makes strong the vow ;
But vows to every purpose must not hold .
Unarm , sweet Hector .

Hold you still , I say ;
Mine honour keeps the weather of my fate :
Life every man holds dear ; but the dear man 
Holds honour far more precious-dear than life .

How now , young man ! mean'st thou to fight to-day ?

Cassandra , call my father to persuade .


No , faith , young Troilus ; doff thy harness , youth ;
I am to-day i' the vein of chivalry :
Let grow thy sinews till their knots be strong ,
And tempt not yet the brushes of the war .
Unarm thee , go , and doubt thou not , brave boy ,
I'll stand to-day for thee and me and Troy .

Brother , you have a vice of mercy in you ,
Which better fits a lion than a man .

What vice is that , good Troilus ? chide me for it .

When many times the captive Grecian falls ,
Even in the fan and wind of your fair sword ,
You bid them rise , and live .

O ! 'tis fair play .

Fool's play , by heaven , Hector .

How now ! how now !

For the love of all the gods ,
Let's leave the hermit pity with our mothers ,
And when we have our armours buckled on ,
The venom'd vengeance ride upon our swords ,
Spur them to ruthful work , rein them from ruth .

Fie , savage , fie !

Hector , then 'tis wars .

Troilus , I would not have you fight to-day .

Who should withhold me ?
Not fate , obedience , nor the hand of Mars 
Beckoning with fiery truncheon my retire ;
Not Priamus and Hecuba on knees ,
Their eyes o'ergalled with recourse of tears ;
Nor you , my brother , with your true sword drawn ,
Oppos'd to hinder me , should stop my way ,
But by my ruin .


Lay hold upon him , Priam , hold him fast :
He is thy crutch ; now if thou lose thy stay ,
Thou on him leaning , and all Troy on thee ,
Fall all together .

Come , Hector , come ; go back :
Thy wife hath dream'd ; thy mother hath had visions ;
Cassandra doth foresee ; and I myself 
Am like a prophet suddenly enrapt ,
To tell thee that this day is ominous :
Therefore , come back .

neas is a-field ;
And I do stand engag'd to many Greeks ,
Even in the faith of valour , to appear 
This morning to them .

Ay , but thou shalt not go .

I must not break my faith .
You know me dutiful ; therefore , dear sir ,
Let me not shame respect , but give me leave 
To take that course by your consent and voice ,
Which you do here forbid me , royal Priam .

O Priam ! yield not to him .

Do not , dear father .

Andromache , I am offended with you :
Upon the love you bear me , get you in .


This foolish , dreaming , superstitious girl 
Makes all these bodements .

O farewell ! dear Hector .
Look ! how thou diest ; look ! how thy eye turns pale ;
Look ! how thy wounds do bleed at many vents :
Hark ! how Troy roars : how Hecuba cries out !
How poor Andromache shrills her dolours forth !
Behold , distraction , frenzy , and amazement ,
Like witless anticks , one another meet ,
And all cry Hector ! Hector's dead ! O Hector !

Away ! Away !

Farewell . Yet , soft ! Hector , I take my leave :
Thou dost thyself and all our Troy deceive .


You are amaz'd , my liege , at her exclaim .
Go in and cheer the town : we'll forth and fight ;
Do deeds worth praise and tell you them at night .

Farewell : the gods with safety stand about thee !


They are at it , hark ! Proud Diomed , believe ,
I come to lose my arm , or win my sleeve .


Do you hear , my lord ? do you hear ?

What now ?

Here's a letter come from yond poor girl .

Let me read .

A whoreson tisick , a whoreson rascally tisick so troubles me , and the foolish fortune of this girl ; and what one thing , what another , that I shall leave you one o' these days : and I have a rheum in mine eyes too , and such an ache in my bones that , unless a man were cursed , I cannot tell what to think on't . What says she there ?

Words , words , mere words , no matter from the heart ;
The effect doth operate another way .

Go , wind to wind , there turn and change together .
My love with words and errors still she feeds ,
But edifies another with her deeds .


Now they are clapper-clawing one another ; I'll go look on . That dissembling abominable varlet , Diomed , has got that same scurvy doting foolish young knave's sleeve of Troy there in his helm : I would fain see them meet ; that that same young Trojan ass , that loves the whore there , might send that Greekish whoremasterly villain , with the sleeve , back to the dissembling luxurious drab , on a sleeveless errand . O' the other side , the policy of those crafty swearing rascals ,that stale old mouse-eaten dry cheese , Nestor , and that same dog-fox , Ulysses , is not proved worth a blackberry : they set me up , in policy , that mongrel cur , Ajax , against that dog of as bad a kind , Achilles ; and now is the cur Ajax prouder than the cur Achilles , and will not arm to-day ; whereupon the Grecians begin to proclaim barbarism , and policy grows into an ill opinion . Soft ! here comes sleeve , and t' other .


Fly not ; for shouldst thou take the river Styx ,
I would swim after .

Thou dost miscall retire :
I do not fly ; but advantageous care 
Withdrew me from the odds of multitude .
Have at thee !

Hold thy whore , Grecian ! now for thy whore , Trojan ! now the sleeve , now the sleeve !

What art thou , Greek ? art thou for Hector's match ?
Art thou of blood and honour ?

No , no , I am a rascal ; a scurvy railing knave ; a very filthy rogue .

I do believe thee : live .


God-a-mercy , that thou wilt believe me ; but a plague break thy neck for frighting me ! What's become of the wenching rogues ? I think they have swallowed one another : I would laugh at that miracle ; yet , in a sort , lechery eats itself . I'll seek them .


Go , go , my servant , take thou Troilus' horse ;
Present the fair steed to my Lady Cressid :
Fellow , commend my service to her beauty :
Tell her I have chastis'd the amorous Trojan ,
And am her knight by proof .

I go , my lord .

Renew , renew ! The fierce Polydamas 
Hath beat down Menon ; bastard Margarelon 
Hath Doreus prisoner ,
And stands colossus-wise , waving his beam ,
Upon the pashed corses of the kings 
Epistrophus and Cedius ; Polixenes is slain ;
Amphimachus , and Thoas , deadly hurt ;
Patroclus ta'en , or slain ; and Palamedes 
Sore hurt and bruis'd ; the dreadful Sagittary 
Appals our numbers : haste we , Diomed ,
To reinforcement , or we perish all .


Go , bear Patroclus' body to Achilles ;
And bid the snail-pac'd Ajax arm for shame .
There is a thousand Hectors in the field :
Now here he fights on Galathe his horse ,
And there lacks work ; anon he's there afoot ,
And there they fly or die , like scaled sculls 
Before the belching whale ; then is he yonder ,
And there the strawy Greeks , ripe for his edge ,
Fall down before him , like the mower's swath :
Here , there , and everywhere , he leaves and takes ,
Dexterity so obeying appetite 
That what he will he does ; and does so much 
That proof is called impossibility .


O ! courage , courage , princes ; great Achilles 
Is arming , weeping , cursing , vowing vengeance :
Patroclus' wounds have rous'd his drowsy blood ,
Together with his mangled Myrmidons ,
That noseless , handless , hack'd and chipp'd , come to him ,
Crying on Hector . Ajax hath lost a friend ,
And foams at mouth , and he is arm'd and at it ,
Roaring for Troilus , who hath done to-day 
Mad and fantastic execution ,
Engaging and redeeming of himself 
With such a careless force and forceless care 
As if that luck , in very spite of cunning ,
Bade him win all .


Troilus ! thou coward Troilus !


Ay , there , there .

So , so , we draw together .


Where is this Hector ?
Come , come , thou boy-queller , show thy face ;
Know what it is to meet Achilles angry :
Hector ! where's Hector ? I will none but Hector .


Troilus , thou coward Troilus , show thy head !


Troilus , I say ! where's Troilus ?

What wouldst thou ?

I would correct him .

Were I the general , thou shouldst have my office 
Ere that correction . Troilus , I say ! what , Troilus !


O traitor Diomed ! Turn thy false face , thou traitor !
And pay thy life thou ow'st me for my horse !

Ha ! art thou there ?

I'll fight with him alone : stand , Diomed .

He is my prize ; I will not look upon .

Come , both you cogging Greeks ; have at you both !

Yea , Troilus ? O , well fought , my youngest brother !


Now I do see thee . Ha ! have at thee , Hector !

Pause , if thou wilt .

I do disdain thy courtesy , proud Trojan .
Be happy that my arms are out of use :
My rest and negligence befriend thee now ,
But thou anon shalt hear of me again ;
Till when , go seek thy fortune .


Fare thee well :
I would have been much more a fresher man ,
Had I expected thee . How now , my brother !


Ajax hath ta'en  neas : shall it be ?
No , by the flame of yonder glorious heaven ,
He shall not carry him : I'll be ta'en too ,
Or bring him off . Fate , hear me what I say !
I reck not though I end my life to-day .

Stand , stand , thou Greek ; thou art a goodly mark .
No ? wilt thou not ? I like thy armour well ;
I'll frush it , and unlock the rivets all ,
But I'll be master of it . Wilt thou not , beast , abide ?
Why then , fly on , I'll hunt thee for thy hide .


Come here about me , you my Myrmidons ;
Mark what I say . Attend me where I wheel :
Strike not a stroke , but keep yourselves in breath :
And when I have the bloody Hector found ,
Empale him with your weapons round about ;
In fellest manner execute your aims .
Follow me , sirs , and my proceedings eye :
It is decreed , Hector the great must die .

The cuckold and the cuckold-maker are at it . Now , bull ! now , dog ! 'Loo , Paris , 'loo ! now , my double-henned sparrow ! 'loo , Paris , 'loo ! The bull has the game : 'ware horns , ho !

Turn , slave , and fight .

What art thou ?

A bastard son of Priam's .

I am a bastard too ; I love bastards : I am a bastard begot , bastard instructed , bastard in mind , bastard in valour , in every thing illegitimate . One bear will not bite another , and wherefore should one bastard ? Take heed , the quarrel's most ominous to us : if the son of a whore fight for a whore , he tempts judgment . Farewell , bastard .


The devil take thee , coward !


Most putrefied core , so fair without ,
Thy goodly armour thus hath cost thy life .
Now is my day's work done ; I'll take good breath :
Rest , sword ; thou hast thy fill of blood and death .

Look , Hector , how the sun begins to set ;
How ugly night comes breathing at his heels :
Even with the vail and darking of the sun ,
To close the day up , Hector's life is done .

I am unarm'd ; forego this vantage , Greek .

Strike , fellows , strike ! this is the man I seek .

So , Ilion , fall thou next ! now , Troy , sink down !
Here lies thy heart , thy sinews , and thy bone .
On ! Myrmidons , and cry you all amain ,
'Achilles hath the mighty Hector slain .' 

Hark ! a retreat upon our Grecian part .

The Trojan trumpets sound the like , my lord .

The dragon wing of night o'erspreads the earth ,
And , stickler-like , the armies separates .
My half-supp'd sword , that frankly would have fed ,
Pleas'd with this dainty bait , thus goes to bed .

Come , tie his body to my horse's tail ;
Along the field I will the Trojan trail .


Hark ! hark ! what shout is that ?

Peace , drums !


Achilles !
Achilles ! Hector's slain ! Achilles !

The bruit is , Hector's slain , and by Achilles .

If it be so , yet bragless let it be ;
Great Hector was a man as good as he .

March patiently along . Let one be sent 
To pray Achilles see us at our tent .
If in his death the gods have us befriended ,
Great Troy is ours , and our sharp wars are ended .

Stand , ho ! yet are we masters of the field .
Never go home ; here starve we out the night .


Hector is slain .

Hector ! the gods forbid !

He's dead ; and at the murderer's horse's tail ,
In beastly sort , dragg'd through the shameful field .
Frown on , you heavens , effect your rage with speed !
Sit , gods , upon your thrones , and smile at Troy !
I say , at once let your brief plagues be mercy ,
And linger not our sure destructions on !

My lord , you do discomfort all the host .

You understand me not that tell me so .
I do not speak of flight , of fear , of death ;
But dare all imminence that gods and men 
Address their dangers in . Hector is gone :
Who shall tell Priam so , or Hecuba ?
Let him that will a screech-owl aye be call'd 
Go in to Troy , and say there Hector's dead :
There is a word will Priam turn to stone ,
Make wells and Niobes of the maids and wives ,
Cold statues of the youth ; and , in a word ,
Scare Troy out of itself . But march away :
Hector is dead ; there is no more to say .
Stay yet . You vile abominable tents ,
Thus proudly pight upon our Phrygian plains ,
Let Titan rise as early as he dare ,
I'll through and through you ! And , thou great-siz'd coward ,
No space of earth shall sunder our two hates :
I'll haunt thee like a wicked conscience still ,
That mouldeth goblins swift as frenzy's thoughts .
Strike a free march to Troy ! with comfort go :
Hope of revenge shall hide our inward woe .

But hear you , hear you !

Hence , broker lackey ! ignomy and shame 
Pursue thy life , and live aye with thy name !


A goodly medicine for my aching bones ! O world ! world ! world ! thus is the poor agent despised . O traitors and bawds , how earnestly are you set a-work , and how ill requited ! why should our endeavour be so loved , and the performance so loathed ? what verse for it ? what instance for it ?Let me see !

Full merrily the humble-bee doth sing ,
Till he hath lost his honey and his sting ;
And being once subdu'd in armed tail ,
Sweet honey and sweet notes together fail .

Good traders in the flesh , set this in your painted cloths .

As many as be here of pander's hall ,
Your eyes , half out , weep out at Pandar's fall ;
Or if you cannot weep , yet give some groans ,
Though not for me , yet for your aching bones .
Brethren and sisters of the hold-door trade ,
Some two months hence my will shall here be made .
It should be now , but that my fear is this ,
Some galled goose of Winchester would hiss .
Till then I'll sweat , and seek about for eases ;
And at that time bequeath you my diseases

TWELFTH-NIGHT; OR WHAT YOU WILL

 
If music be the food of love , play on ;
Give me excess of it , that , surfeiting ,
The appetite may sicken , and so die .
That strain again ! it had a dying fall :
O ! it came o'er my ear like the sweet sound 
That breathes upon a bank of violets ,
Stealing and giving odour . Enough ! no more :
'Tis not so sweet now as it was before .
O spirit of love ! how quick and fresh art thou ,
That , notwithstanding thy capacity 
Receiveth as the sea , nought enters there ,
Of what validity and pitch soe'er ,
But falls into abatement and low price ,
Even in a minute : so full of shapes is fancy ,
That it alone is high fantastical .

Will you go hunt , my lord ?

What , Curio ?

The hart .

Why , so I do , the noblest that I have .
O ! when mine eyes did see Olivia first ,
Methought she purg'd the air of pestilence .
That instant was I turn'd into a hart ,
And my desires , like fell and cruel hounds ,
E'er since pursue me .

How now ! what news from her ?

So please my lord , I might not be admitted ;
But from her handmaid do return this answer :
The element itself , till seven years' heat ,
Shall not behold her face at ample view ;
But , like a cloistress , she will veiled walk ,
And water once a day her chamber round 
With eve-offending brine : all this , to season 
A brother's dead love , which she would keep fresh 
And lasting in her sad remembrance .

O ! she that hath a heart of that fine frame 
To pay this debt of love but to a brother ,
How will she love , when the rich golden shaft 
Hath kill'd the flock of all affections else 
That live in her ; when liver , brain , and heart ,
These sovereign thrones , are all supplied , and fill'd 
Her sweet perfections with one self king .
Away before me to sweet beds of flowers ;
Love-thoughts lie rich when canopied with bowers .


What country , friends , is this ?

This is Illyria , lady .

And what should I do in Illyria ?
My brother he is in Elysium .
Perchance he is not drown'd : what think you sailors ?

It is perchance that you yourself were sav'd .

O my poor brother ! and so perchance may he be .

True , madam : and , to comfort you with chance ,
Assure yourself , after our ship did split ,
When you and those poor number sav'd with you 
Hung on our driving boat , I saw your brother ,
Most provident in peril , bind himself ,
Courage and hope both teaching him the practice ,
To a strong mast that liv'd upon the sea ;
Where , like Arion on the dolphin's back ,
I saw him hold acquaintance with the waves 
So long as I could see .

For saying so there's gold .
Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope ,
Whereto thy speech serves for authority ,
The like of him . Know'st thou this country ?

Ay , madam , well ; for I was bred and born 
Not three hours' travel from this very place .

Who governs here ?

A noble duke , in nature as in name .

What is his name ?

Orsino .

Orsino ! I have heard my father name him :
He was a bachelor then .

And so is now , or was so very late ;
For but a month ago I went from hence ,
And then 'twas fresh in murmur ,as , you know ,
What great ones do the less will prattle of ,
That he did seek the love of fair Olivia .

What's she ?

A virtuous maid , the daughter of a count 
That died some twelvemonth since ; then leaving her 
In the protection of his son , her brother ,
Who shortly also died : for whose dear love ,
They say she hath abjur'd the company 
And sight of men .

O ! that I serv'd that lady ,
And might not be deliver'd to the world ,
Till I had made mine own occasion mellow ,
What my estate is .

That were hard to compass ,
Because she will admit no kind of suit ,
No , not the duke's .

There is a fair behaviour in thee , captain ;
And though that nature with a beauteous wall 
Doth oft close in pollution , yet of thee 
I will believe thou hast a mind that suits 
With this thy fair and outward character .
I prithee ,and I'll pay thee bounteously ,
Conceal me what I am , and be my aid 
For such disguise as haply shall become 
The form of my intent . I'll serve this duke :
Thou shalt present me as a eunuch to him :
It may be worth thy pains ; for I can sing 
And speak to him in many sorts of music 
That will allow me very worth his service .
What else may hap to time I will commit ;
Only shape thou thy silence to my wit .

Be you his eunuch , and your mute I'll be :
When my tongue blabs , then let mine eyes not see .

I thank thee : lead me on .


What a plague means my niece , to take the death of her brother thus ? I am sure care's an enemy to life .

By my troth , Sir Toby , you must come in earlier o' nights : your cousin , my lady , takes great exceptions to your ill hours .

Why , let her except before excepted .

Ay , but you must confine yourself within the modest limits of order .

Confine ! I'll confine myself no finer than I am . These clothes are good enough to drink in , and so be these boots too : an they be not , let them hang themselves in their own straps .

That quaffing and drinking will undo you : I heard my lady talk of it yesterday ; and of a foolish knight that you brought in one night here to be her wooer .

Who ? Sir Andrew Aguecheek ?

Ay , he .

He's as tall a man as any's in Illyria .

What's that to the purpose ?

Why , he has three thousand ducats a year .

Ay , but he'll have but a year in all these ducats : he's a very fool and a prodigal .

Fie , that you'll say so ! he plays o' the viol-de-gamboys , and speaks three or four languages word for word without book , and hath all the good gifts of nature .

He hath indeed , almost natural ; for , besides that he's a fool , he's a great quarreller ; and but that he hath the gift of a coward to allay the gust he hath in quarrelling , 'tis thought among the prudent he would quickly have the gift of a grave .

By this hand , they are scoundrels and substractors that say so of him . Who are they ?

They that add , moreover , he's drunk nightly in your company .

With drinking healths to my niece . I'll drink to her as long as there is a passage in my throat and drink in Illyria . He's a coward and a coystril , that will not drink to my niece till his brains turn o' the toe like a parish-top . What , wench ! Castiliano vulgo ! for here comes Sir Andrew Agueface .


Sir Toby Belch ! how now , Sir Toby Belch !

Sweet Sir Andrew !

Bless you , fair shrew .

And you too , sir .

Accost , Sir Andrew , accost .

What's that ?

My niece's chambermaid .

Good Mistress Accost , I desire better acquaintance .

My name is Mary , sir .

Good Mistress Mary Accost ,

You mistake , knight : 'accost' is , front her , board her , woo her , assail her .

By my troth , I would not undertake her in this company . Is that the meaning of 'accost ?' 

Fare you well , gentlemen .

An thou let her part so , Sir Andrew , would thou mightst never draw sword again !

An you part so , mistress , I would I might never draw sword again . Fair lady , do you think you have fools in hand ?

Sir , I have not you by the hand .

Marry , but you shall have ; and here's my hand .

Now , sir , 'thought is free :' I pray you , bring your hand to the buttery-bar and let it drink .

Wherefore , sweetheart ? what's your metaphor ?

It's dry , sir .

Why , I think so : I am not such an ass but I can keep my hand dry . But what's your jest ?

A dry jest , sir .

Are you full of them ?

Ay , sir , I have them at my fingers' ends : marry , now I let go your hand , I am barren .


O knight ! thou lackest a cup of canary : when did I see thee so put down ?

Never in your life , I think ; unless you see canary put me down . Methinks sometimes I have no more wit than a Christian or an ordinary man has ; but I am a great eater of beef , and I believe that does harm to my wit .

No question .

An I thought that , I'd forswear it .
I'll ride home to-morrow , Sir Toby .

Pourquoi , my dear knight ?

What is 'pourquoi ?' do or not do ? I would I had bestowed that time in the tongues that I have in fencing , dancing , and bear-baiting . O ! had I but followed the arts !

Then hadst thou had an excellent head of hair .

Why , would that have mended my hair ?

Past question ; for thou seest it will not curl by nature .

But it becomes me well enough , does't not ?

Excellent ; it hangs like flax on a distaff , and I hope to see a housewife take thee between her legs , and spin it off .

Faith , I'll home to-morrow , Sir Toby : your niece will not be seen ; or if she be , it's four to one she'll none of me . The count himself here hard by woos her .

She'll none o' the count ; she'll not match above her degree , neither in estate , years , nor wit ; I have heard her swear it . Tut , there's life in't , man .

I'll stay a month longer . I am a fellow o' the strangest mind i' the world ; I delight in masques and revels sometimes altogether .

Art thou good at these kickchawses , knight ?

As any man in Illyria , whatsoever he be , under the degree of my betters : and yet I will not compare with an old man .

What is thy excellence in a galliard , knight ?

Faith , I can cut a caper .

And I can cut the mutton to't .

And I think I have the back-trick simply as strong as any man in Illyria .

Wherefore are these things hid ? wherefore have these gifts a curtain before 'em ? are they like to take dust , like Mistress Mall's picture ? why dost thou not go to church in a galliard , and come home in a coranto ? My very walk should be a jig : I would not so much as make water but in a sink-a-pace . What dost thou mean ? is it a world to hide virtues in ? I did think , by the excellent constitution of thy leg , it was formed under the star of a galliard .

Ay , 'tis strong , and it does indifferent well in a flame-coloured stock . Shall we set about some revels ?

What shall we do else ? were we not born under Taurus ?

Taurus ! that's sides and heart .

No , sir , it is legs and thighs . Let me see thee caper . Ha ! higher : ha , ha ! excellent !


If the duke continue these favours towards you , Cesario , you are like to be much advanced : he hath known you but three days , and already you are no stranger .

You either fear his humour or my negligence , that you call in question the continuance of his love . Is he inconstant , sir , in his favours ?

No , believe me .

I thank you . Here comes the count .


Who saw Cesario ? ho !

On your attendance , my lord ; here .

Stand you awhile aloof . Cesario ,
Thou know'st no less but all ; I have unclasp'd 
To thee the book even of my secret soul :
Therefore , good youth , address thy gait unto her ,
Be not denied access , stand at her doors ,
And tell them , there thy fixed foot shall grow 
Till thou have audience .

Sure , my noble lord ,
If she be so abandon'd to her sorrow 
As it is spoke , she never will admit me .

Be clamorous and leap all civil bounds 
Rather than make unprofited return .

Say I do speak with her , my lord , what then ?

O ! then unfold the passion of my love ;
Surprise her with discourse of my dear faith :
It shall become thee well to act my woes ;
She will attend it better in thy youth 
Than in a nuncio of more grave aspect .

I think not so , my lord .

Dear lad , believe it ;
For they shall yet belie thy happy years 
That say thou art a man : Diana's lip 
Is not more smooth and rubious ; thy small pipe 
Is as the maiden's organ , shrill and sound ;
And all is semblative a woman's part .
I know thy constellation is right apt 
For this affair . Some four or five attend him ;
All , if you will ; for I myself am best 
When least in company . Prosper well in this ,
And thou shalt live as freely as thy lord ,
To call his fortunes thine .

I'll do my best 
To woo your lady :

yet , a barful strife !
Whoe'er I woo , myself would be his wife .


Nay , either tell me where thou hast been , or I will not open my lips so wide as a bristle may enter in way of thy excuse . My lady will hang thee for thy absence .

Let her hang me : he that is well hanged in this world needs to fear no colours .

Make that good .

He shall see none to fear .

A good lenten answer : I can tell thee where that saying was born , of , 'I fear no colours .' 

Where , good Mistress Mary ?

In the wars ; and that may you be bold to say in your foolery .

Well , God give them wisdom that have it ; and those that are fools , let them use their talents .

Yet you will be hanged for being so long absent ; or , to be turned away , is not that as good as a hanging to you ?

Many a good hanging prevents a bad marriage ; and , for turning away , let summer bear it out .

You are resolute then ?

Not so , neither ; but I am resolved on two points .

That if one break , the other will hold ; or , if both break , your gaskins fall .

Apt , in good faith ; very apt . Well , go thy way : if Sir Toby would leave drinking , thou wert as witty a piece of Eve's flesh as any in Illyria .

Peace , you rogue , no more o' that . Here comes my lady : make your excuse wisely , you were best .


Wit , an't be thy will , put me into good fooling ! Those wits that think they have thee , do very oft prove fools ; and I , that am sure I lack thee , may pass for a wise man : for what says Quinapalus ? 'Better a witty fool than a foolish wit .' 

God bless thee , lady !

Take the fool away .

Do you not hear , fellows ? Take away the lady .

Go to , you're a dry fool ; I'll no more of you : besides , you grow dishonest .

Two faults , madonna , that drink and good counsel will amend : for give the dry fool drink , then is the fool not dry ; bid the dishonest man mend himself : if he mend , he is no longer dishonest ; if he cannot , let the botcher mend him . Any thing that's mended is but patched : virtue that transgresses is but patched with sin ; and sin that amends is but patched with virtue . If that this simple syllogism will serve , so ; if it will not , what remedy ? As there is no true cuckold but calamity , so beauty's a flower . The lady bade take away the fool ; therefore , I say again , take her away .

Sir , I bade them take away you .

Misprision in the highest degree ! Lady , cucullus non facit monachum ; that's as much to say as I wear not motley in my brain . Good madonna , give me leave to prove you a fool .

Can you do it ?

Dexteriously , good madonna .

Make your proof .

I must catechise you for it , madonna : good my mouse of virtue , answer me .

Well , sir , for want of other idleness , I'll bide your proof .

Good madonna , why mournest thou ?

Good fool , for my brother's death .

I think his soul is in hell , madonna .

I know his soul is in heaven , fool .

The more fool , madonna , to mourn for your brother's soul being in heaven . Take away the fool , gentlemen .

What think you of this fool , Malvolio ? doth he not mend ?

Yes ; and shall do , till the pangs of death shake him : infirmity , that decays the wise , doth ever make the better fool .

God send you , sir , a speedy infirmity , for the better increasing your folly ! Sir Toby will be sworn that I am no fox , but he will not pass his word for two pence that you are no fool .

How say you to that , Malvolio ?

I marvel your ladyship takes delight in such a barren rascal : I saw him put down the other day with an ordinary fool that has no more brain than a stone . Look you now , he's out of his guard already ; unless you laugh and minister occasion to him , he is gagged . I protest , I take these wise men , that crow so at these set kind of fools , no better than the fools' zanies .

O ! you are sick of self-love , Malvolio , and taste with a distempered appetite . To be generous , guiltless , and of free disposition , is to take those things for bird-bolts that you deem cannon-bullets . There is no slander in an allowed fool , though he do nothing but rail ; nor no railing in a known discreet man , though he do nothing but reprove .

Now , Mercury endue thee with leasing , for thou speakest well of fools !


Madam , there is at the gate a young gentleman much desires to speak with you .

From the Count Orsino , is it ?

I know not , madam : 'tis a fair young man , and well attended .

Who of my people hold him in delay ?

Sir Toby , madam , your kinsman .

Fetch him off , I pray you : he speaks nothing but madman . Fie on him !


Now you see , sir , how your fooling grows old , and people dislike it .

Thou hast spoken for us , madonna , as if thy eldest son should be a fool ; whose skull Jove cram with brains ! for here comes one of thy kin has a most weak pia mater .


By mine honour , half drunk . What is he at the gate , cousin ?

A gentleman .

A gentleman ! what gentleman ?

'Tis a gentleman here ,a plague o' these pickle herring ! How now , sot !

Good Sir Toby .

Cousin , cousin , how have you come so early by this lethargy ?

Lechery ! I defy lechery ! There's one at the gate .

Ay , marry , what is he ?

Let him be the devil , an he will , I care not : give me faith , say I . Well , it's all one .


What's a drunken man like , fool ?

Like a drowned man , a fool , and a madman : one draught above heat makes him a fool , the second mads him , and a third drowns him .

Go thou and seek the crowner , and let him sit o' my coz ; for he's in the third degree of drink , he's drowned : go , look after him .

He is but mad yet , madonna ; and the fool shall look to the madman .

Madam , yond young fellow swears he will speak with you . I told him you were sick : he takes on him to understand so much , and therefore comes to speak with you . I told him you were asleep : he seems to have a foreknowledge of that too , and therefore comes to speak with you . What is to be said to him , lady ? he's fortified against any denial .

Tell him he shall not speak with me .

Ha's been told so ; and he says , he'll stand at your door like a sheriff's post , and be the supporter to a bench , but he'll speak with you .

What kind o' man is he ?

Why , of mankind .

What manner of man ?

Of very ill manner : he'll speak with you , will you or no .

Of what personage and years is he ?

Not yet old enough for a man , nor young enough for a boy ; as a squash is before 'tis a peascod , or a codling when 'tis almost an apple : 'tis with him in standing water , between boy and man . He is very well-favoured , and he speaks very shrewishly : one would think his mother's milk were scarce out of him .

Let him approach . Call in my gentlewoman .

Gentlewoman , my lady calls .

Give me my veil : come , throw it o'er my face .
We'll once more hear Orsino's embassy .


The honourable lady of the house , which is she ?

Speak to me ; I shall answer for her .
Your will ?

Most radiant , exquisite , and unmatchable beauty ,I pray you tell me if this be the lady of the house , for I never saw her : I would be loath to cast away my speech ; for , besides that it is excellently well penned , I have taken great pains to con it . Good beauties , let me sustain no scorn ; I am very comptible , even to the least sinister usage .

Whence came you , sir ?

I can say little more than I have studied , and that question's out of my part . Good gentle one , give me modest assurance if you be the lady of the house , that I may proceed in my speech .

Are you a comedian ?

No , my profound heart ; and yet , by the very fangs of malice I swear I am not that I play . Are you the lady of the house ?

If I do not usurp myself , I am .

Most certain , if you are she , you do usurp yourself ; for , what is yours to bestow is not yours to reserve . But this is from my commission : I will on with my speech in your praise , and then show you the heart of my message .

Come to what is important in't : I forgive you the praise .

Alas ! I took great pains to study it , and 'tis poetical .

It is the more like to be feigned : I pray you keep it in . I heard you were saucy at my gates , and allowed your approach rather to wonder at you than to hear you . If you be not mad , be gone ; if you have reason , be brief : 'tis not that time of moon with me to make one in so skipping a dialogue .

Will you hoist sail , sir ? here lies your way .

No , good swabber ; I am to hull here a little longer . Some mollification for your giant , sweet lady .

Tell me your mind .

I am a messenger .

Sure , you have some hideous matter to deliver , when the courtesy of it is so fearful . Speak your office .

It alone concerns your ear . I bring no overture of war , no taxation of homage : I hold the olive in my hand ; my words are as full of peace as matter .

Yet you began rudely . What are you ? what would you ?

The rudeness that hath appear'd in me have I learn'd from my entertainment . What I am , and what I would , are as secret as maiden-head ; to your ears , divinity ; to any other's , profanation .

Give us the place alone : we will hear this divinity .

Now , sir ; what is your text ?

Most sweet lady ,

A comfortable doctrine , and much may be said of it . Where lies your text ?

In Orsino's bosom .

In his bosom ! In what chapter of his bosom ?

To answer by the method , in the first of his heart .

O ! I have read it : it is heresy . Have you no more to say ?

Good madam , let me see your face .

Have you any commission from your lord to negotiate with my face ? you are now out of your text : but we will draw the curtain and show you the picture .

Look you , sir , such a one I was as this present : is't not well done ?

Excellently done , if God did all .

'Tis in grain , sir ; 'twill endure wind and weather .

'Tis beauty truly blent , whose red and white 
Nature's own sweet and cunning hand laid on :
Lady , you are tho cruell'st she alive ,
If you will lead these graces to the grave 
And leave the world no copy .

O ! sir , I will not be so hard-hearted ; I will give out divers schedules of my beauty : it shall be inventoried , and every particle and utensil labelled to my will : as Item , Two lips , indifferent red ; Item , Two grey eyes , with lids to them ; Item , One neck , one chin , and so forth . Were you sent hither to praise me ?

I see you what you are : you are too proud ;
But , if you were the devil , you are fair .
My lord and master loves you : O ! such love 
Could be but recompens'd , though you were crown'd 
The nonpareil of beauty .

How does he love me ?

With adorations , with fertile tears ,
With groans that thunder love , with sighs of fire .

Your lord does know my mind ; I cannot love him ;
Yet I suppose him virtuous , know him noble ,
Of great estate , of fresh and stainless youth ;
In voices well divulg'd , free , learn'd , and valiant ;
And , in dimension and the shape of nature 
A gracious person ; but yet I cannot love him :
He might have took his answer long ago .

If I did love you in my master's flame ,
With such a suffering , such a deadly life ,
In your denial I would find no sense ;
I would not understand it .

Why , what would you ?

Make me a willow cabin at your gate ,
And call upon my soul within the house ;
Write loyal cantons of contemned love ,
And sing them loud even in the dead of night ;
Holla your name to the reverberate hills ,
And make the babbling gossip of the air 
Cry out , 'Olivia !' O ! you should not rest 
Between the elements of air and earth ,
But you should pity me !

You might do much . What is your parentage ?

Above my fortune , yet my state is well :
I am a gentleman .

Get you to your lord :
I cannot love him . Let him send no more ,
Unless , perchance , you come to me again ,
To tell me how he takes it . Fare you well :
I thank you for your pains : spend this for me .

I am no fee'd post , lady ; keep your purse :
My master , not myself , lacks recompense .
Love make his heart of flint that you shall love ,
And let your fervour , like my master's , be 
Plac'd in contempt ! Farewell , fair cruelty .


'What is your parentage ?' 
'Above my fortunes , yet my state is well :
I am a gentleman .' I'll be sworn thou art :
Thy tongue , thy face , thy limbs , actions , and spirit ,
Do give thee five-fold blazon . Not too fast : soft ! soft !
Unless the master were the man . How now !
Even so quickly may one catch the plague ?
Methinks I feel this youth's perfections 
With an invisible and subtle stealth 
To creep in at mine eyes . Well , let it be .
What , ho ! Malvolio !


Here , madam , at your service .

Run after that same peevish messenger ,
The county's man : he left this ring behind him ,
Would I , or not : tell him I'll none of it .
Desire him not to flatter with his lord ,
Nor hold him up with hopes : I'm not for him .
If that the youth will come this way to-morrow ,
I'll give him reasons for't . Hie thee , Malvolio .

Madam , I will .


I do I know not what , and fear to find 
Mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind .
Fate , show thy force : ourselves we do not owe ;
What is decreed must be , and be this so !

Will you stay no longer ? nor will you not that I go with you ?

By your patience , no . My stars shine darkly over me ; the malignancy of my fate might , perhaps , distemper yours ; therefore I shall crave of you your leave that I may bear my evils alone . It were a bad recompense for your love to lay any of them on you .

Let me yet know of you whither you are bound .

No , sooth , sir : my determinate voyage is mere extravagancy . But I perceive in you so excellent a touch of modesty that you will not extort from me what I am willing to keep in ; therefore , it charges me in manners the rather to express myself . You must know of me then , Antonio , my name is Sebastian , which I called Roderigo . My father was that Sebastian of Messaline , whom I know you have heard of . He left behind him myself and a sister , both born in an hour : if the heavens had been pleased , would we had so ended ! but you , sir , altered that ; for some hour before you took me from the breach of the sea was my sister drowned .

Alas the day !

A lady , sir , though it was said she much resembled me , was yet of many accounted beautiful : but , though I could not with such estimable wonder overfar believe that , yet thus far I will boldly publish her : she bore a mind that envy could not but call fair . She is drowned already , sir , with salt water , though I seem to drown her remembrance again with more .

Pardon me , sir , your bad entertainment .

O good Antonio ! forgive me your trouble !

If you will not murder me for my love , let me be your servant .

If you will not undo what you have done , that is , kill him whom you have recovered , desire it not . Fare ye well at once : my bosom is full of kindness ; and I am yet so near the manners of my mother , that upon the least occasion more mine eyes will tell tales of me . I am bound to the Count Orsino's court : farewell .


The gentleness of all the gods go with thee !
I have many enemies in Orsino's court ,
Else would I very shortly see thee there ;
But , come what may , I do adore thee so ,
That danger shall seem sport , and I will go .


Were not you even now with the Countess Olivia ?

Even now , sir : on a moderate pace I have since arrived but hither .

She returns this ring to you , sir : you might have saved me my pains , to have taken it away yourself . She adds , moreover , that you should put your lord into a desperate assurance she will none of him . And one thing more ; that you be never so hardy to come again in his affairs , unless it be to report your lord's taking of this . Receive it so .

She took the ring of me ; I'll none of it .

Come , sir , you peevishly threw it to her ; and her will is it should be so returned : if it be worth stooping for , there it lies in your eye ; if not , be it his that finds it .


I left no ring with her : what means this lady ?
Fortune forbid my outside have not charm'd her !
She made good view of me ; indeed , so much ,
That sure methought her eyes had lost her tongue ,
For she did speak in starts distractedly .
She loves me , sure ; the cunning of her passion 
Invites me in this churlish messenger .
None of my lord's ring ! why , he sent her none .
I am the man : if it be so , as 'tis ,
Poor lady , she were better love a dream .
Disguise , I see , thou art a wickedness ,
Wherein the pregnant enemy does much .
How easy is it for the proper-false 
In women's waxen hearts to set their forms !
Alas ! our frailty is the cause , not we !
For such as we are made of , such we be .
How will this fadge ? My master loves her dearly ;
And I , poor monster , fond as much on him ;
And she , mistaken , seems to dote on me .
What will become of this ? As I am man ,
My state is desperate for my master's love ;
As I am woman ,now alas the day !
What thriftless sighs shall poor Olivia breathe !
O time ! thou must untangle this , not I ;
It is too hard a knot for me to untie .


Approach , Sir Andrew : not to be a-bed after midnight is to be up betimes ; and diluculo surgere , thou knowest ,

Nay , by my troth , I know not ; but I know , to be up late is to be up late .

A false conclusion : I hate it as an unfilled can . To be up after midnight and to go to bed then , is early ; so that to go to bed after midnight is to go to bed betimes . Does not our life consist of the four elements ?

Faith , so they say ; but , I think , it rather consists of eating and drinking .

Thou art a scholar ; let us therefore eat and drink . Marian , I say ! a stoup of wine !


Here comes the fool , i' faith .

How now , my hearts ! Did you never see the picture of 'we three ?' 

Welcome , ass . Now let's have a catch .

By my troth , the fool has an excellent breast . I had rather than forty shillings I had such a leg , and so sweet a breath to sing , as the fool has . In sooth , thou wast in very gracious fooling last night , when thou spokest of Pigrogromitus , of the Vapians passing the equinoctial of Queubus : 'twas very good , i' faith . I sent thee sixpence for thy leman : hadst it ?

I did impeticos thy gratillity ; for Malvolio's nose is no whipstock : my lady has a white hand , and the Myrmidons are no bottleale houses .

Excellent ! Why , this is the best fooling , when all is done . Now , a song .

Come on ; there is sixpence for you : let's have a song .

There's a testril of me too : if one knight give a 

Would you have a love-song , or a song of good life ?

A love-song , a love-song .

Ay , ay ; I care not for good life .


O mistress mine ! where are you roaming ?
O ! stay and hear ; your true love's coming ,
That can sing both high and low .
Trip no further , pretty sweeting ;
Journeys end in lovers meeting ,
Every wise man's son doth know .


Excellent good , i' faith .

Good , good .


What is love ? 'tis not hereafter ;
Present mirth hath present laughter ;
What's to come is still unsure :
In delay there lies no plenty ;
Then come kiss me , sweet and twenty ,
Youth's a stuff will not endure .


A mellifluous voice , as I am true knight .

A contagious breath .

Very sweet and contagious , i' faith .

To hear by the nose , it is dulcet in contagion . But shall we make the welkin dance indeed ? Shall we rouse the night-owl in a catch that will draw three souls out of one weaver ? shall we do that ?

An you love me , let's do't : I am dog at a catch .

By'r lady , sir , and some dogs will catch well .

Most certain . Let our catch be , 'Thou knave .' 

Hold thy peace , thou knave ,' knight ? I shall be constrain'd in't to call thee knave , knight .

'Tis not the first time I have constrained one to call me knave . Begin , fool : it begins , 'Hold thy peace .' 

I shall never begin if I hold my peace .

Good , i' faith . Come , begin .

What a caterwauling do you keep here ! If my lady have not called up her steward Malvolio and bid him turn you out of doors , never trust me .

My lady's a Cataian ; we are politicians ; Malvolio's a Peg-a-Ramsey , and 'Three merry men be we .' Am not I consanguineous ? am I not of her blood ? Tillyvally , lady !
There dwelt a man in Babylon , lady , lady !

Beshrew me , the knight's in admirable fooling .

Ay , he does well enough if he be disposed , and so do I too : he does it with a better grace , but I do it more natural .

O ! the twelfth day of December ,

For the love o' God , peace !


My masters , are you mad ? or what are you ? Have you no wit , manners , nor honesty , but to gabble like tinkers at this time of night ? Do ye make an alehouse of my lady's house , that ye squeak out your coziers' catches without any mitigation or remorse of voice ? Is there no respect of place , persons , nor time , in you ?

We did keep time , sir , in our catches . Sneck up !

Sir Toby , I must be round with you . My lady bade me tell you , that , though she harbours you as her kinsman , she's nothing allied to your disorders . If you can separate yourself and your misdemeanours , you are welcome to the house ; if not , an it would please you to take leave of her , she is very willing to bid you farewell .

Farewell , dear heart , since I must needs be gone .

Nay , good Sir Toby .

His eyes do show his days are almost done .

Is't even so ?

But I will never die .

Sir Toby , there you lie .

This is much credit to you .

Shall I bid him go ?

What an if you do ?

Shall I bid him go , and spare not ?

O ! no , no , no , no , you dare not .

'Out o' time !' Sir , ye lie . Art any more than a steward ? Dost thou think , because thou art virtuous , there shall be no more cakes and ale ?

Yes , by Saint Anne ; and ginger shall be hot i' the mouth too .

Thou'rt i' the right . Go , sir , rub your chain with crumbs . A stoup of wine , Maria !

Mistress Mary , if you prized my lady's favour at anything more than contempt , you would not give means for this uncivil rule : she shall know of it , by this hand .


Go shake your ears .

'Twere as good a deed as to drink when a man's a-hungry , to challenge him the field , and then to break promise with him and make a fool of him .

Do't , knight : I'll write thee a challenge ; or I'll deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth .

Sweet Sir Toby , be patient for to-night : since the youth of the count's was to-day with my lady , she is much out of quiet . For Monsieur Malvolio , let me alone with him : if I do not gull him into a nayword , and make him a common recreation , do not think I have wit enough to lie straight in my bed . I know I can do it .

Possess us , possess us ; tell us something of him .

Marry , sir , sometimes he is a kind of puritan .

O ! if I thought that , I'd beat him like a dog .

What , for being a puritan ? thy exquisite reason , dear knight ?

I have no exquisite reason for't , but I have reason good enough .

The devil a puritan that he is , or anything constantly but a time-pleaser ; an affectioned ass , that cons state without book , and utters it by great swarths : the best persuaded of himself ; so crammed , as he thinks , with excellences , that it is his ground of faith that all that look on him love him ; and on that vice in him will my revenge find notable cause to work .

What wilt thou do ?

I will drop in his way some obscure epistles of love ; wherein , by the colour of his beard , the shape of his leg , the manner of his gait , the expressure of his eye , forehead , and complexion , he shall find himself most feelingly personated . I can write very like my lady your niece ; on a forgotten matter we can hardly make distinction of our hands .

Excellent ! I smell a device .

I have't in my nose too .

He shall think , by the letters that thou wilt drop , that they come from my niece , and that she is in love with him .

My purpose is , indeed , a horse of that colour .

And your horse now would make him an ass .

Ass , I doubt not .

O ! 'twill be admirable .

Sport royal , I warrant you : I know my physic will work with him . I will plant you two , and let the fool make a third , where he shall find the letter : observe his construction of it . For this night , to bed , and dream on the event . Farewell .


Good night , Penthesilea .

Before me , she's a good wench .

She's a beagle , true-bred , and one that adores me : what o' that ?

I was adored once too .

Let's to bed , knight . Thou hadst need send for more money .

If I cannot recover your niece , I am a foul way out .

Send for money , knight : if thou hast her not i' the end , call me cut .

If I do not , never trust me , take it how you will .

Come , come : I'll go burn some sack ; 'tis too late to go to bed now . Come , knight ; come , knight .


Give me some music . Now , good morrow , friends :
Now , good Cesario , but that piece of song ,
That old and antique song we heard last night ;
Methought it did relieve my passion much ,
More than light airs and recollected terms 
Of these most brisk and giddy-paced times :
Come ; but one verse .

He is not here , so please your lordship , that should sing it .

Who was it ?

Feste , the jester , my lord ; a fool that the Lady Olivia's father took much delight in . He is about the house .

Seek him out , and play the tune the while .

Come hither , boy : if ever thou shalt love ,
In the sweet pangs of it remember me ;
For such as I am all true lovers are :
Unstaid and skittish in all motions else 
Save in the constant image of the creature 
That is belov'd . How dost thou like this tune ?

It gives a very echo to the seat 
Where love is thron'd .

Thou dost speak masterly .
My life upon't , young though thou art , thine eye 
Hath stay'd upon some favour that it loves ;
Hath it not , boy ?

A little , by your favour .

What kind of woman is't ?

Of your complexion .

She is not worth thee , then . What years , i' faith ?

About your years , my lord .

Too old , by heaven . Let still the woman take 
An elder than herself , so wears she to him ,
So sways she level in her husband's heart :
For , boy , however we do praise ourselves ,
Our fancies are more giddy and unfirm ,
More longing , wavering , sooner lost and worn ,
Than women's are .

I think it well , my lord .

Then , let thy love be younger than thyself ,
Or thy affection cannot hold the bent ;
For women are as roses , whose fair flower 
Being once display'd , doth fall that very hour .

And so they are : alas , that they are so ;
To die , even when they to perfection grow !


O , fellow ! come , the song we had last night .
Mark it , Cesario ; it is old and plain ;
The spinsters and the knitters in the sun ,
And the free maids that weave their thread with bones ,
Do use to chant it : it is silly sooth ,
And dallies with the innocence of love ,
Like the old age .

Are you ready , sir ?

Ay ; prithee , sing .


Come away , come away , death ,
And in sad cypress let me be laid ;
Fly away , fly away , breath ;
I am slain by a fair cruel maid .
My shroud of white , stuck all with yew ,
O ! prepare it 
My part of death , no one so true 
Did share it .


Not a flower , not a flower sweet ,
On my black coffin let there be strown ,
Not a friend , not a friend greet 
My poor corse , where my bones shall be thrown .
A thousand thousand sighs to save ,
Lay me , O ! where 
Sad true lover never find my grave ,
To weep there .


There's for thy pains .

No pains , sir ; I take pleasure in singing , sir .

I'll pay thy pleasure then .

Truly , sir , and pleasure will be paid , one time or another .

Give me now leave to leave thee .

Now , the melancholy god protect thee , and the tailor make thy doublet of changeable taffeta , for thy mind is a very opal ! I would have men of such constancy put to sea , that their business might be everything and their intent everywhere ; for that's it that always makes a good voyage of nothing . Farewell .


Let all the rest give place .

Once more , Cesario ,
Get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty :
Tell her , my love , more noble than the world ,
Prizes not quantity of dirty lands ;
The parts that fortune hath bestow'd upon her ,
Tell her , I hold as giddily as fortune ;
But 'tis that miracle and queen of gems 
That nature pranks her in attracts my soul .

But if she cannot love you , sir ?

I cannot be so answer'd .

Sooth , but you must .
Say that some lady , as perhaps , there is ,
Hath for your love as great a pang of heart 
As you have for Olivia : you cannot love her ;
You tell her so ; must she not then be answer'd ?

There is no woman's sides 
Can bide the beating of so strong a passion 
As love doth give my heart ; no woman's heart 
So big , to hold so much ; they lack retention .
Alas ! their love may be call'd appetite ,
No motion of the liver , but the palate ,
That suffer surfeit , cloyment , and revolt ;
But mine is all as hungry as the sea ,
And can digest as much . Make no compare 
Between that love a woman can bear me 
And that I owe Olivia .

Ay , but I know ,

What dost thou know ?

Too well what love women to men may owe :
In faith , they are as true of heart as we .
My father had a daughter lov'd a man ,
As it might be , perhaps , were I a woman ,
I should your lordship .

And what's her history ?

A blank , my lord . She never told her love ,
But let concealment , like a worm i' the bud ,
Feed on her damask cheek : she pin'd in thought ,
And with a green and yellow melancholy ,
She sat like Patience on a monument ,
Smiling at grief . Was not this love indeed ?
We men may say more , swear more ; but indeed 
Our shows are more than will , for still we prove 
Much in our vows , but little in our love .

But died thy sister of her love , my boy ?

I am all the daughters of my father's house ,
And all the brothers too ; and yet I know not .
Sir , shall I to this lady ?

Ay , that's the theme .
To her in haste ; give her this jewel ; say 
My love can give no place , bide no denay .


Come thy ways , Signior Fabian .

Nay , I'll come : if I lose a scruple of this sport , let me be boiled to death with melancholy .

Wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly rascally sheep-biter come by some notable shame ?

I would exult , man : you know he brought me out o' favour with my lady about a bear-baiting here .

To anger him we'll have the bear again ; and we will fool him black and blue ; shall we not , Sir Andrew ?

An we do not , it is pity of our lives .

Here comes the little villain .

How now , my metal of India !

Get ye all three into the box-tree . Malvolio's coming down this walk : he has been yonder i' the sun practising behaviour to his own shadow this half-hour . Observe him , for the love of mockery ; for I know this letter will make a contemplative idiot of him . Close , in the name of jesting ! Lie thou there :

for here comes the trout that must be caught with tickling .

'Tis but fortune ; all is fortune . Maria once told me she did affect me ; and I have heard herself come thus near , that should she fancy , it should be one of my complexion . Besides , she uses me with a more exalted respect than anyone else that follows her . What should I think on't ?

Here's an over-weening rogue !

O , peace ! Contemplation makes a rare turkey-cock of him : how he jets under his advanced plumes !

'Slight , I could so beat the rogue !

Peace ! I say .

To be Count Malvolio !

Ah , rogue !

Pistol him , pistol him .

Peace ! peace !

There is example for't : the lady of the Strachy married the yeoman of the wardrobe .

Fie on him , Jezebel !

O , peace ! now he's deeply in ; look how imagination blows him .

Having been three months married to her , sitting in my state ,

O ! for a stone-bow , to hit him in the eye !

Calling my officers about me , in my branched velvet gown ; having come from a daybed , where I have left Olivia sleeping ,

Fire and brimstone !

O , peace ! peace !

And then to have the humour of state : and after a demure travel of regard , telling them I know my place , as I would they should do theirs , to ask for my kinsman Toby ,

Bolts and shackles !

O , peace , peace , peace ! now , now .

Seven of my people , with an obedient start , make out for him . I frown the while ; and perchance wind up my watch , or play with my some rich jewel . Toby approaches ; curtsies there to me ,

Shall this fellow live ?

Though our silence be drawn from us with cars , yet peace !

I extend my hand to him thus , quenching my familiar smile with an austere regard of control ,

And does not Toby take you a blow o' the lips then ?

Saying , 'Cousin Toby , my fortunes having cast me on your niece give me this prerogative of speech ,' 

What , what ?

'You must amend your drunkenness .' 

Out , scab !

Nay , patience , or we break the sinews of our plot .

'Besides , you waste the treasure of your time with a foolish knight ,' 

That's me , I warrant you .

'One Sir Andrew ,' 

I knew 'twas I ; for many do call me fool .

What employment have we here ?

Now is the woodcock near the gin .

O , peace ! and the spirit of humours intimate reading aloud to him !

By my life , this is my lady's hand ! these be her very C's , her U's , and her T's ; and thus makes she her great P's . It is , in contempt of question , her hand .

Her C's , her U's , and her T's : why that 

To the unknown beloved , this and my good wishes : her very phrases ! By your leave , wax . Soft ! and the impressure her Lucrece , with which she uses to seal : 'tis my lady . To whom should this be ?

This wins him , liver and all .


Jove knows I love ;
But who ?
Lips , do not move 
No man must know .

'No man must know .' What follows ? the numbers altered ! 'No man must know :' if this should be thee , Malvolio !

Marry , hang thee , brock !


I may command where I adore ;
But silence , like a Lucrece knife ,
With bloodless stroke my heart doth gore :
M , O , A , I , doth sway my life .


A fustian riddle !

Excellent wench , say I .

'M , O , A , I , doth sway my life .' Nay , but first , let me see , let me see , let me see .

What dish o' poison has she dressed him !

And with what wing the staniel checks at it !

'I may command where I adore .' Why , she may command me : I serve her ; she is my lady . Why , this is evident to any formal capacity ; there is no obstruction in this . And the end , what should that alphabetical position portend ? if I could make that resemble something in me ,Softly !M , O , A , I ,

O ! ay , make up that : he is now at a cold scent .

Sowter will cry upon 't , for all this , though it be as rank as a fox .

M , Malvolio ; M , why , that begins my name .

Did not I say he would work it out ? the cur is excellent at faults .

M ,But then there is no consonancy in the sequel ; that suffers under probation : A should follow , but O does .

And O shall end , I hope .

Ay , or I'll cudgel him , and make him cry , O !

And then I comes behind .

Ay , an you had any eye behind you , you might see more detraction at your heels than fortunes before you .

M , O , A , I ; this simulation is not as the former ; and yet , to crush this a little , it would bow to me , for every one of these letters are in my name . Soft ! here follows prose .

If this fall into thy hand , revolve . In my stars I am above thee ; but be not afraid of greatness : some are born great , some achieve greatness , and some have greatness thrust upon them . Thy Fates open their hands ; let thy blood and spirit embrace them ; and to inure thyself to what thou art like to be , cast thy humble slough , and appear fresh . Be opposite with a kinsman , surly with servants ; let thy tongue tang arguments of state ; put thyself into the trick of singularity She thus advises thee that sighs for thee . Remember who commended thy yellow stockings , and wished to see thee ever cross-gartered : I say , remember . Go to , thou art made , if thou desirest to be so ; if not , let me see thee a steward still , the fellow of servants , and not worthy to touch Fortune's fingers . Farewell . She that would alter services with thee . THE FORTUNATE-UNHAPPY .

Daylight and champian discovers not more : this is open . I will be proud , I will read politic authors , I will baffle Sir Toby , I will wash off gross acquaintance , I will be point-devise the very man . I do not now fool myself , to let imagination jade me , for every reason excites to this , that my lady loves me . She did commend my yellow stockings of late , she did praise my leg being cross-gartered ; and in this she manifests herself to my love , and , with a kind of injunction drives me to these habits of her liking . I thank my stars I am happy . I will be strange , stout , in yellow stockings , and cross-gartered , even with the swiftness of putting on . Jove and my stars be praised ! Here is yet a postscript .

Thou canst not choose but know who I am . If thou entertainest my love , let it appear in thy smiling ; thy smiles become thee well ; therefore in my presence still smile , dear my sweet , I prithee .

Jove , I thank thee . I will smile : I will do everything that thou wilt have me .


I will not give my part of this sport for a pension of thousands to be paid from the Sophy .

I could marry this wench for this device .

So could I too .

And ask no other dowry with her but such another jest .

Nor I neither .

Here comes my noble gull-catcher .


Wilt thou set thy foot o' my neck ?

Or o' mine either ?

Shall I play my freedom at tray-trip , and become thy bond-slave ?

I' faith , or I either ?

Why , thou hast put him in such a dream , that when the image of it leaves him he must run mad .

Nay , but say true ; does it work upon him ?

Like aqua-vit  with a midwife .

If you will , then see the fruits of the sport , mark his first approach before my lady ; he will come to her in yellow stockings , and 'tis a colour she abhors ; and cross-gartered , a fashion she detests ; and he will smile upon her , which will now be so unsuitable to her disposition , being addicted to a melancholy as she is , that it cannot but turn him into a notable contempt . If you will see it , follow me .

To the gates of Tartar , thou most excellent devil of wit !

I'll make one too .

Save thee , friend , and thy music . Dost thou live by thy tabor ?

No , sir , I live by the church .

Art thou a churchman ?

No such matter , sir : I do live by the church ; for I do live at my house , and my house doth stand by the church .

So thou mayst say , the king lies by a beggar , if a beggar dwell near him ; or , the church stands by thy tabor , if thy tabor stand by the church .

You have said , sir . To see this age !
A sentence is but a cheveril glove to a good wit : how quickly the wrong side may be turned outward !

Nay , that's certain : they that dally nicely with words may quickly make them wanton .

I would therefore my sister had had no name , sir .

Why , man ?

Why , sir , her name's a word ; and to dally with that word might make my sister wanton . But indeed , words are very rascals since bonds disgraced them .

Thy reason , man ?

Troth , sir , I can yield you none without words ; and words are grown so false , I am loath to prove reason with them .

I warrant thou art a merry fellow , and carest for nothing .

Not so , sir , I do care for something ; but in my conscience , sir , I do not care for you : if that be to care for nothing , sir , I would it would make you invisible .

Art not thou the Lady Olivia's fool ?

No , indeed , sir ; the Lady Olivia has no folly : she will keep no fool , sir , till she be married ; and fools are as like husbands as pilchards are to herrings the husband's the bigger . I am indeed not her fool , but her corrupter of words .

I saw thee late at the Count Orsino's .

Foolery , sir , does walk about the orb like the sun ; it shines every where . I would be sorry , sir , but the fool should be as oft with your master as with my mistress . I think I saw your wisdom there .

Nay , an thou pass upon me , I'll no more with thee . Hold , there's sixpence for thee .


Now Jove , in his next commodity of hair , send thee a beard !

By my troth , I'll tell thee , I am almost sick for one , though I would not have it grow on my chin . Is thy lady within ?

Would not a pair of these have bred , sir ?

Yes , being kept together and put to use .

I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia , sir , to bring a Cressida to this Troilus .

I understand you , sir ; 'tis well begg'd .

The matter , I hope , is not great , sir , begging but a beggar : Cressida was a beggar . My lady is within , sir . I will conster to them whence you come ; who you are and what you would are out of my welkin ; I might say 'element ,' but the word is overworn .


This fellow's wise enough to play the fool ,
And to do that well craves a kind of wit :
He must observe their mood on whom he jests ,
The quality of persons , and the time ,
And , like the haggard , check at every feather 
That comes before his eye . This is a practice 
As full of labour as a wise man's art ;
For folly that he wisely shows is fit ;
But wise men folly-fall'n , quite taint their wit .


Save you , gentleman .

And you , sir .

Dieu vous garde , monsieur .

Et vous aussi ; votre serviteur .

I hope , sir , you are ; and I am yours .

Will you encounter the house ? my niece is desirous you should enter , if your trade be to her .

I am bound to your niece , sir : I mean , she is the list of my voyage .

Taste your legs , sir : put them to motion .

My legs do better understand me , sir , than I understand what you mean by bidding me taste my legs .

I mean , to go , sir , to enter .

I will answer you with gait and entrance . But we are prevented .

Most excellent accomplished lady , the heavens rain odours on you !

That youth's a rare courtier . 'Rain odours !' well .

My matter hath no voice , lady , but to your own most pregnant and vouchsafed ear .

'Odours ,' 'pregnant ,' and 'vouchsafed .' I'll get 'em all three all ready .

Let the garden door be shut , and leave me to my hearing .

Give me your hand , sir .

My duty , madam , and most humble service .

What is your name ?

Cesario is your servant's name , fair princess .

My servant , sir ! 'Twas never merry world 
Since lowly feigning was call'd compliment .
You're servant to the Count Orsino , youth .

And he is yours , and his must needs be yours :
Your servant's servant is your servant , madam .

For him , I think not on him : for his thoughts ,
Would they were blanks rather than fill'd with me !

Madam , I come to whet your gentle thoughts 
On his behalf .

O ! by your leave , I pray you ,
I bade you never speak again of him :
But , would you undertake another suit ,
I had rather hear you to solicit that 
Than music from the spheres .

Dear lady ,

Give me leave , beseech you . I did send ,
After the last enchantment you did here ,
A ring in chase of you : so did I abuse 
Myself , my servant , and , I fear me , you :
Under your hard construction must I sit ,
To force that on you , in a shameful cunning ,
Which you knew none of yours : what might you think ?
Have you not set mine honour at the stake ,
And baited it with all th' unmuzzled thoughts 
That tyrannous heart can think ? To one of your receiving 
Enough is shown ; a cypress , not a bosom ,
Hideth my heart . So , let me hear you speak .

I pity you .

That's a degree to love .

No , not a grize ; for 'tis a vulgar proof 
That very oft we pity enemies .

Why , then methinks 'tis time to smile again .
O world ! how apt the poor are to be proud .
If one should be a prey , how much the better 
To fall before the lion than the wolf !

The clock upbraids me with the waste of time .
Be not afraid , good youth , I will not have you :
And yet , when wit and youth is come to harvest ,
Your wife is like to reap a proper man :
There lies your way , due west .

Then westward-ho !
Grace and good disposition attend your ladyship !
You'll nothing , madam , to my lord by me ?

Stay :
I prithee , tell me what thou think'st of me .

That you do think you are not what you are .

If I think so , I think the same of you .

Then think you right : I am not what I am .

I would you were as I would have you be !

Would it be better , madam , than I am ?
I wish it might , for now I am your fool .

O ! what a deal of scorn looks beautiful 
In the contempt and anger of his lip .
A murderous guilt shows not itself more soon 
Than love that would seem hid ; love's night is noon .
Cesario , by the roses of the spring ,
By maidhood , honour , truth , and every thing ,
I love thee so , that , maugre all thy pride ,
Nor wit nor reason can my passion hide .
Do not extort thy reasons from this clause ,
For that I woo , thou therefore hast no cause ;
But rather reason thus with reason fetter ,
Love sought is good , but giv'n unsought is better .

By innocence I swear , and by my youth ,
I have one heart , one bosom , and one truth ,
And that no woman has ; nor never none 
Shall mistress be of it , save I alone .
And so adieu , good madam : never more 
Will I my master's tears to you deplore .

Yet come again , for thou perhaps mayst move 
That heart , which now abhors , to like his love .


No , faith , I'll not stay a jot longer .

Thy reason , dear venom ; give thy reason .

You must needs yield your reason , Sir Andrew .

Marry , I saw your niece do more favours to the count's serving-man than ever she bestowed upon me ; I saw't i' the orchard .

Did she see thee the while , old boy ? tell me that .

As plain as I see you now .

This was a great argument of love in her toward you .

'Slight ! will you make an ass o' me ?

I will prove it legitimate , sir , upon the oaths of judgment and reason .

And they have been grand-jurymen since before Noah was a sailor .

She did show favour to the youth in your sight only to exasperate you , to awake your dormouse valour , to put fire in your heart , and brimstone in your liver . You should then have accosted her , and with some excellent jests , firenew from the mint , you should have banged the youth into dumbness . This was looked for at your hand , and this was balked : the double gilt of this opportunity you let time wash off , and you are now sailed into the north of my lady's opinion ; where you will hang like an icicle on a Dutchman's beard , unless you do redeem it by some laudable attempt , either of valour or policy .

An't be any way , it must be with valour , for policy I hate : I had as lief be a Brownist as a politician .

Why , then , build me thy fortunes upon the basis of valour : challenge me the count's youth to fight with him ; hurt him in eleven places : my niece shall take note of it ; and assure thyself , there is no love-broker in the world can more prevail in man's commendation with woman than report of valour .

There is no way but this , Sir Andrew .

Will either of you bear me a challenge to him ?

Go , write it in a martial hand ; be curst and brief ; it is no matter how witty , so it be eloquent , and full of invention : taunt him with the licence of ink : if thou thou'st him some thrice , it shall not be amiss ; and as many lies as will lie in thy sheet of paper , although the sheet were big enough for the bed of Ware in England , set 'em down : go , about it . Let there be gall enough in thy ink , though thou write with a goose-pen , no matter : about it .

Where shall I find you ?

We'll call thee at the cubiculo : go .


This is a dear manakin to you , Sir Toby .

I have been dear to him , lad , some two thousand strong , or so .

We shall have a rare letter from him ; but you'll not deliver it .

Never trust me , then ; and by all means stir on the youth to an answer . I think oxen and wainropes cannot hale them together . For Andrew , if he were opened , and you find so much blood in his liver as will clog the foot of a flea , I'll eat the rest of the anatomy .

And his opposite , the youth , bears in his visage no great presage of cruelty .

Look , where the youngest wren of nine comes .


If you desire the spleen , and will laugh yourselves into stitches , follow me . Yond gull Malvolio is turned heathen , a very renegado ; for there is no Christian , that means to be saved by believing rightly , can ever believe such impossible passages of grossness . He's in yellow stockings .

And cross-gartered ?

Most villanously ; like a pedant that keeps a school i' the church . I have dogged him like his murderer . He does obey every point of the letter that I dropped to betray him : he does smile his face into more lines than are in the new map with the augmentation of the Indies . You have not seen such a thing as 'tis ; I can hardly forbear hurling things at him . I know my lady will strike him : if she do , he'll smile and take't for a great favour .

Come , bring us , bring us where he is .


I would not by my will have troubled you ;
But since you make your pleasure of your pains ,
I will no further chide you .

I could not stay behind you : my desire ,
More sharp than filed steel , did spur me forth ;
And not all love to see you ,though so much 
As might have drawn one to a longer voyage ,
But jealousy what might befall your travel ,
Being skilless in these parts ; which to a stranger ,
Unguided and unfriended , often prove 
Rough and unhospitable : my willing love ,
The rather by these arguments of fear ,
Set forth in your pursuit .

My kind Antonio ,
I can no other answer make but thanks ,
And thanks , and ever thanks ; for oft good turns 
Are shuffled off with such uncurrent pay :
But , were my worth , as is my conscience , firm ,
You should find better dealing . What's to do ?
Shall we go see the reliques of this town ?

To-morrow , sir : best first go see your lodging .

I am not weary , and 'tis long to night :
I pray you , let us satisfy our eyes 
With the memorials and the things of fame 
That do renown this city .

Would you'd pardon me ;
I do not without danger walk these streets :
Once , in a sea-fight 'gainst the Count his galleys ,
I did some service ; of such note indeed ,
That were I ta'en here it would scarce be answer'd .

Belike you slew great number of his people ?

The offence is not of such a bloody nature ,
Albeit the quality of the time and quarrel 
Might well have given us bloody argument .
It might have since been answer'd in repaying 
What we took from them ; which , for traffic's sake ,
Most of our city did : only myself stood out ;
For which , if I be lapsed in this place ,
I shall pay dear .

Do not then walk too open .

It doth not fit me . Hold , sir ; here's my purse .
In the south suburbs , at the Elephant ,
Is best to lodge : I will bespeak our diet ,
Whiles you beguile the time and feed your knowledge 
With viewing of the town : there shall you have me .

Why I your purse ?

Haply your eye shall light upon some toy 
You have desire to purchase ; and your store ,
I think , is not for idle markets , sir .

I'll be your purse-bearer and leave you for an hour .

To the Elephant .

I do remember .


I have sent after him : he says he'll come ;
How shall I feast him ? what bestow of him ?
For youth is bought more oft than begg'd or borrow'd .
I speak too loud .
Where is Malvolio ? he is sad , and civil ,
And suits well for a servant with my fortunes :
Where is Malvolio ?

He's coming , madam ; but in very strange manner . He is sure possess'd , madam .

Why , what's the matter ? does he rave ?

No , madam ; he does nothing but smile : your ladyship were best to have some guard about you if he come , for sure the man is tainted in's wits .

Go call him hither .

I am as mad as he ,
If sad and merry madness equal be .

How now , Malvolio !

Sweet lady , ho , ho .

Smil'st thou ?
I sent for thee upon a sad occasion .

Sad , lady ! I could be sad : this does make some obstruction in the blood , this crossgartering ; but what of that ? if it please the eye of one , it is with me as the very true sonnet is , 'Please one and please all .' 

Why , how dost thou , man ? what is the matter with thee ?

Not black in my mind , though yellow in my legs . It did come to his hands , and commands shall be executed : I think we do know the sweet Roman hand .

Wilt thou go to bed , Malvolio ?

To bed ! ay , sweetheart ; and I'll come to thee .

God comfort thee ! Why dost thou smile so and kiss thy hand so oft ?

How do you , Malvolio ?

At your request ! Yes ; nightingales answer daws .

Why appear you with this ridiculous boldness before my lady ?

'Be not afraid of greatness :' 'Twas well writ .

What meanest thou by that , Malvolio ?

'Some are born great ,' 

Ha !

'Some achieve greatness ,' 

What sayst thou ?

'And some have greatness thrust upon them .' 

Heaven restore thee !

'Remember who commended thy yellow stockings ,' 

Thy yellow stockings !

'And wished to see thee cross-gartered .' 

Cross-gartered !

'Go to , thou art made , if thou desirest to be so ,' 

Am I made ?

'If not , let me see thee a servant still .' 

Why , this is very midsummer madness .


Madam , the young gentleman of the Count Orsino's is returned . I could hardly entreat him back : he attends your ladyship's pleasure .

I'll come to him .

Good Maria , let this fellow be looked to . Where's my cousin Toby ? Let some of my people have a special care of him : I would not have him miscarry for the half of my dowry .


Oh , ho ! do you come near me now ? no worse man than Sir Toby to look to me ! This concurs directly with the letter : she sends him on purpose , that I may appear stubborn to him ; for she incites me to that in the letter . 'Cast thy humble slough ,' says she ; 'be opposite with a kinsman , surly with servants ; let thy tongue tang with arguments of state ; put thyself into the trick of singularity ;' and consequently sets down the manner how ; as , a sad face , a reverend carriage , a slow tongue , in the habit of some sir of note , and so forth . I have limed her ; but it is Jove's doing , and Jove make me thankful ! And when she went away now , 'Let this fellow be looked to ;' fellow ! not Malvolio , nor after my degree , but fellow . Why , everything adheres together , that no dram of a scruple , no scruple of a scruple , no obstacle , no incredulous or unsafe circumstance What can be said ? Nothing that can be can come between me and the full prospect of my hopes . Well , Jove , not I , is the doer of this , and he is to be thanked .


Which way is he , in the name of sanctity ? If all the devils in hell be drawn in little , and Legion himself possess'd him , yet I'll speak to him .

Here he is , here he is . How is't with you , sir ? how is't with you , man ?

Go off ; I discard you : let me enjoy my private ; go off .

Lo , how hollow the fiend speaks within him ! did not I tell you ? Sir Toby , my lady prays you to have a care of him .

Ah , ha ! does she so ?

Go to , go to : peace ! peace ! we must deal gently with him ; let me alone . How do you , Malvolio ? how is't with you ? What , man ! defy the devil : consider , he's an enemy to mankind .

Do you know what you say ?

La you ! an you speak ill of the devil , how he takes it at heart . Pray God , he be not bewitched !

Carry his water to the wise-woman .

Marry , and it shall be done to-morrow morning , if I live . My lady would not lose him for more than I'll say .

How now , mistress !

O Lord !

Prithee , hold thy peace ; this is not the way : do you not see you move him ? let me alone with him .

No way but gentleness ; gently , gently : the fiend is rough , and will not be roughly used .

Why , how now , my bawcock ! how dost thou , chuck ?

Sir !

Ay , Biddy , come with me . What , man ! 'tis not for gravity to play at cherry-pit with Satan : hang him , foul collier !

Get him to say his prayers , good Sir Toby , get him to pray .

My prayers , minx !

No , I warrant you , he will not hear of godliness .

Go , hang yourselves all ! you are idle shallow things : I am not of your element . You shall know more hereafter .


Is't possible ?

If this were played upon a stage now , I could condemn it as an improbable fiction .

His very genius hath taken the infection of the device , man .

Nay , pursue him now , lest the device take air , and taint .

Why , we shall make him mad indeed .

The house will be the quieter .

Come , we'll have him in a dark room , and bound . My niece is already in the belief that he's mad : we may carry it thus , for our pleasure and his penance , till our very pastime , tired out of breath , prompt us to have mercy on him ; at which time we will bring the device to the bar , and crown thee for a finder of madmen . But see , but see .


More matter for a May morning .

Here's the challenge ; read it : I warrant there's vinegar and pepper in't .

Is't so saucy ?

Ay , is't , I warrant him : do but read .

Give me . Youth , whatsoever thou art , thou art but a scurvy fellow .

Good , and valiant .

Wonder not , nor admire not in thy mind , why I do call thee so , for I will show thee no reason for't ,

A good note , that keeps you from the blow of the law .

Thou comest to the Lady Olivia , and in my sight she uses thee kindly : but thou liest in thy throat ; that is not the matter I challenge thee for .

Very brief , and to exceeding good sense less .

I will waylay thee going home ; where , if it be thy chance to kill me ,

Good .

Thou killest me like a rogue and a villain .

Still you keep o' the windy side of the law : good .

Fare thee well ; and God have mercy upon one of our souls ! He may have mercy upon mine , but my hope is better ; and so look to thyself . Thy friend , as thou usest him , and thy sworn enemy ,
If this letter move him not , his legs cannot .
I'll give't him .

You may have very fit occasion for for't : he is now in some commerce with my lady , and will by and by depart .

Go , Sir Andrew ; scout me for him at the corner of the orchard like a bum-baily : so soon as ever thou seest him , draw ; and , as thou drawest , swear horrible ; for it comes to pass oft that a terrible oath , with a swaggering accent sharply twanged off , gives manhood more approbation than ever proof itself would have earned him . Away !

Nay , let me alone for swearing .


Now will not I deliver his letter : for the behaviour of the young gentleman gives him out to be of good capacity and breeding ; his employment between his lord and my niece confirms no less : therefore this letter , being so excellently ignorant , will breed no terror in the youth : he will find it comes from a clodpole . But , sir , I will deliver his challenge by word of mouth ; set upon Aguecheek a notable report of valour ; and drive the gentleman ,as I know his youth will aptly receive it ,into a most hideous opinion of his rage , skill , fury , and impetuosity . This will so fright them both that they will kill one another by the look , like cockatrices .

Here he comes with your niece : give them way till he take leave , and presently after him .

I will meditate the while upon some horrid message for a challenge .

I have said too much unto a heart of stone ,
And laid mine honour too unchary out :
There's something in me that reproves my fault ,
But such a headstrong potent fault it is 
That it but mocks reproof .

With the same haviour that your passion bears 
Goes on my master's griefs .

Here ; wear this jewel for me , 'tis my picture ;
Refuse it not ; it hath no tongue to vex you ;
And I beseech you come again to-morrow .
What shall you ask of me that I'll deny ,
That honour sav'd may upon asking give ?

Nothing but this ; your true love for my master .

How with mine honour may I give him that 
Which I have given to you ?

I will acquit you .

Well , come again to-morrow : fare thee well :
A fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell .

Gentleman , God save thee .

And you , sir .

That defence thou hast , betake thee to't : of what nature the wrongs are thou hast done him , I know not ; but thy intercepter , full of despite , bloody as the hunter , attends thee at the orchard-end . Dismount thy tuck , be yare in thy preparation , for thy assailant is quick , skilful , and deadly .

You mistake , sir : I am sure no man hath any quarrel to me : my remembrance is very free and clear from any image of offence done to any man .

You'll find it otherwise , I assure you : therefore , if you hold your life at any price , betake you to your guard ; for your opposite hath in him what youth , strength , skill , and wrath , can furnish man withal .

I pray you , sir , what is he ?

He is knight dubbed with unhatched rapier , and on carpet consideration ; but he is a devil in private brawl : souls and bodies hath he divorced three , and his incensement at this moment is so implacable that satisfaction can be none but by pangs of death and sepulchre . Hob , nob , is his word : give't or take't .

I will return again into the house and desire some conduct of the lady : I am no fighter . I have heard of some kind of men that put quarrels purposely on others to taste their valour ; belike this is a man of that quirk .

Sir , no ; his indignation derives itself out of a very competent injury : therefore get you on and give him his desire . Back you shall not to the house , unless you undertake that with me which with as much safety you might answer him : therefore , on , or strip your sword stark naked ; for meddle you must , that's certain , or forswear to wear iron about you .

This is as uncivil as strange . I beseech you , do me this courteous office , as to know of the knight what my offence to him is : it is something of my negligence , nothing of my purpose .

I will do so . Signior Fabian , stay you by this gentleman till my return .


Pray you , sir , do you know of this matter ?

I know the knight is incensed against you , even to a mortal arbitrement , but nothing of the circumstance more .

I beseech you , what manner of man is he ?

Nothing of that wonderful promise , to read him by his form , as you are like to find him in the proof of his valour . He is , indeed , sir , the most skilful , bloody , and fatal opposite that you could possibly have found in any part of Illyria . Will you walk towards him ? I will make your peace with him if I can .

I shall be much bound to you for't : I am one that had rather go with sir priest than sir knight ; I care not who knows so much of my mettle .

Why , man , he's a very devil ; I have not seen such a firago . I had a pass with him , rapier , scabbard and all , and he gives me the stuck in with such a mortal motion that it is inevitable ; and on the answer , he pays you as surely as your feet hit the ground they step on . They say he has been fencer to the Sophy .

Pox on't , I'll not meddle with him .

Ay , but he will not now be pacified : Fabian can scarce hold him yonder .

Plague on't ; an I thought he had been valiant and so cunning in fence I'd have seen him damned ere I'd have challenged him . Let him let the matter slip , and I'll give him my horse , grey Capilet .

I'll make the motion . Stand here ; make a good show on't : this shall end without the perdition of souls .

Marry , I'll ride your horse as well as I ride you .

I have his horse to take up the quarrel . I have persuaded him the youth's a devil .

He is as horribly conceited of him ; and pants and looks pale , as if a bear were at his heels .

There's no remedy , sir : he will fight with you for his oath's sake . Marry , he hath better bethought him of his quarrel , and he finds that now scarce to be worth talking of : therefore draw for the supportance of his vow : he protests he will not hurt you .

Pray God defend me ! A little thing would make me tell them how much I lack of a man .

Give ground , if you see him furious .

Come , Sir Andrew , there's no remedy : the gentleman will , for his honour's sake , have one bout with you ; he cannot by the duello avoid it : but he has promised me , as he is a gentleman and a soldier , he will not hurt you . Come on ; to't .

Pray God , he keep his oath !


I do assure you , 'tis against my will .

Put up your sword . If this young gentleman 
Have done offence , I take the fault on me :
If you offend him , I for him defy you .


You , sir ! why , what are you ?

One , sir , that for his love dares yet do more 
Than you have heard him brag to you he will .

Nay , if you be an undertaker , I am for you .


O , good sir Toby , hold ! here come the officers .

I'll be with you anon .

Pray , sir , put your sword up , if you please .

Marry , will I , sir ; and , for that I promised you , I'll be as good as my word . He will bear you easily and reins well .


This is the man ; do thy office .

Antonio , I arrest thee at the suit 
Of Count Orsino .

You do mistake me , sir .

No , sir , no jot : I know your favour well ,
Though now you have no sea-cap on your head .
Take him away : he knows I know him well .

I must obey .

This comes with seeking you :
But there's no remedy : I shall answer it .
What will you do , now my necessity 
Makes me to ask you for my purse ? It grieves me 
Much more for what I cannot do for you 
Than what befalls myself . You stand amaz'd :
But be of comfort .

Come , sir , away .

I must entreat of you some of that money .

What money , sir ?
For the fair kindness you have show'd me here ,
And part , being prompted by your present trouble ,
Out of my lean and low ability 
I'll lend you something : my having is not much :
I'll make division of my present with you .
Hold , there is half my coffer .

Will you deny me now ?
Is't possible that my deserts to you 
Can lack persuasion ? Do not tempt my misery ,
Lest that it make me so unsound a man 
As to upbraid you with those kindnesses 
That I have done for you .

I know of none ;
Nor know I you by voice or any feature .
I hate ingratitude more in a man 
Than lying , vainness , babbling drunkenness ,
Or any taint of vice whose strong corruption 
Inhabits our frail blood .

O heavens themselves !

Come , sir : I pray you , go .

Let me speak a little . This youth that you see here 
I snatch'd one-half out of the jaws of death ,
Reliev'd him with such sanctity of love ,
And to his image , which methought did promise 
Most venerable worth , did I devotion .

What's that to us ? The time goes by : away !

But O ! how vile an idol proves this god .
Thou hast , Sebastian , done good feature shame .
In nature there's no blemish but the mind ;
None can be call'd deform'd but the unkind :
Virtue is beauty , but the beauteous evil 
Are empty trunks o'erflourish'd by the devil .

The man grows mad : away with him ! Come , come , sir .

Lead me on .


Methinks his words do from such passion fly ,
That he believes himself ; so do not I .
Prove true , imagination , O , prove true ,
That I , dear brother , be now ta'en for you !

Come hither , knight ; come hither ,
Fabian : we'll whisper o'er a couplet or two of most sage saws .

He nam'd Sebastian : I my brother know 
Yet living in my glass ; even such and so 
In favour was my brother ; and he went 
Still in this fashion , colour , ornament ,
For him I imitate . O ! if it prove ,
Tempests are kind , and salt waves fresh in love !


A very dishonest paltry boy , and more a coward than a hare . His dishonesty appears in leaving his friend here in necessity , and denying him ; and for his cowardship , ask Fabian .

A coward , a most devout coward , religious in it .

'Slid , I'll after him again and beat him .

Do ; cuff him soundly , but never draw thy sword .

An I do not ,


Come , let's see the event .

I dare lay any money 'twill be nothing yet .

Will you make me believe that I am not sent for you ?

Go to , go to ; thou art a foolish fellow :
Let me be clear of thee .

Well held out , i' faith ! No , I do not know you ; nor I am not sent to you by my lady to bid you come speak with her ; nor your name is not Master Cesario ; nor this is not my nose neither . Nothing that is so is so .

I prithee , vent thy folly somewhere else :
Thou know'st not me .

Vent my folly ! He has heard that word of some great man , and now applies it to a fool . Vent my folly ! I am afraid this great lubber , the world , will prove a cockney . I prithee now , ungird thy strangeness and tell me what I shall vent to my lady . Shall I vent to her that thou art coming ?

I prithee , foolish Greek , depart from me :
There's money for thee : if you tarry longer 
I shall give worse payment .

By my troth , thou hast an open hand .
These wise men that give fools money get themselves a good report after fourteen years' purchase .


Now , sir , have I met you again ? there's for you .


Why , there's for thee , and there , and there , and there !

Are all the people mad ?


Hold , sir , or I'll throw your dagger o'er the house .

This will I tell my lady straight . I would not be in some of your coats for twopence .


Come on , sir : hold .

Nay , let him alone ; I'll go another way to work with him : I'll have an action of battery against him if there be any law in Illyria . Though I struck him first , yet it's no matter for that .

Let go thy hand .

Come , sir , I will not let you go . Come , my young soldier , put up your iron : you are well fleshed ; come on .

I will be free from thee .

What wouldst thou now ?
If thou dar'st tempt me further , draw thy sword .

What , what ! Nay then , I must have an ounce or two of this malapert blood from you .

Hold , Toby ! on thy life I charge thee , hold !

Madam !

Will it be ever thus ? Ungracious wretch !
Fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves ,
Where manners ne'er were preach'd . Out of my sight !
Be not offended , dear Cesario .
Rudesby , be gone !

I prithee , gentle friend ,
Let thy fair wisdom , not thy passion , sway 
In this uncivil and unjust extent 
Against thy peace . Go with me to my house ,
And hear thou there how many fruitless pranks 
This ruffian hath botch'd up , that thou thereby 
Mayst smile at this . Thou shalt not choose but go :
Do not deny . Beshrew his soul for me ,
He started one poor heart of mine in thee .

What relish is in this ? how runs the stream ?
Or I am mad , or else this is a dream :
Let fancy still my sense in Lethe steep ;
If it be thus to dream , still let me sleep !

Nay ; come , I prithee . Would thou'dst be rul'd by me !

Madam , I will .

O ! say so , and so be !


Nay , I prithee , put on this gown and this beard ; make him believe thou art Sir Topas the curate : do it quickly ; I'll call Sir Toby the whilst .


Well , I'll put it on and I will dissemble myself in't : and I would I were the first that ever dissembled in such a gown . I am not tall enough to become the function well , nor lean enough to be thought a good student ; but to be said an honest man and a good housekeeper goes as fairly as to say a careful man and a great scholar . The competitors enter .


God bless thee , Master parson .

Bonos dies , Sir Toby : for , as the old hermit of Prague , that never saw pen and ink , very wittily said to a niece of King Gorboduc , 'That , that is , is ;' so I , being Master parson , am Master parson ; for , what is 'that ,' but 'that ,' and 'is ,' but 'is ?' 

To him , Sir Topas .

What ho ! I say . Peace in this prison !

The knave counterfeits well ; a good knave .

Who calls there ?

Sir Topas , the curate , who comes to visit Malvolio the lunatic .

Sir Topas , Sir Topas , good Sir Topas , go to my lady .

Out , hyperbolical fiend ! how vexest thou this man ! Talkest thou nothing but of ladies ?

Well said , Master Parson .

Sir Topas , never was man thus wronged . Good Sir Topas , do not think I am mad : they have laid me here in hideous darkness .

Fie , thou dishonest Satan ! I call thee by the most modest terms ; for I am one of those gentle ones that will use the devil himself with courtesy . Sayst thou that house is dark ?

As hell , Sir Topas .

Why , it hath bay-windows transparent as barricadoes , and the clerestories toward the south-north are as lustrous as ebony ; and yet complainest thou of obstruction ?

I am not mad , Sir Topas . I say to you , this house is dark .

Madman , thou errest : I say , there is no darkness but ignorance , in which thou art more puzzled than the Egyptians in their fog .

I say this house is as dark as ignorance , though ignorance were as dark as hell ; and I say , there was never man thus abused . I am no more mad than you are : make the trial of it in any constant question .

What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning wild fowl ?

That the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird .

What thinkest thou of his opinion ?

I think nobly of the soul , and no way approve his opinion .

Fare thee well : remain thou still in darkness : thou shalt hold the opinion of Pythagoras ere I will allow of thy wits , and fear to kill a woodcock , lest thou dispossess the soul of thy grandam . Fare thee well .

Sir Topas ! Sir Topas !

My most exquisite Sir Topas !

Nay , I am for all waters .

Thou mightst have done this without thy beard and gown : he sees thee not .

To him in thine own voice , and bring me word how thou findest him : I would we were well rid of this knavery . If he may be conveniently delivered , I would he were ; for I am now so far in offence with my niece that I cannot pursue with any safety this sport to the upshot . Come by and by to my chamber .

Hey Robin , jolly Robin ,
Tell me how thy lady does .


Fool !

My lady is unkind , perdy !

Fool !

Alas , why is she so ?

Fool , I say !

She loves another .
Who calls , ha ?

Good fool , as ever thou wilt deserve well at my hand , help me to a candle , and pen , ink , and paper . As I am a gentleman , I will live to be thankful to thee for't .

Master Malvoliol 

Ay , good fool .

Alas , sir , how fell you beside your five wits ?

Fool , there was never man so notoriously abused : I am as well in my wits , fool , as thou art .

But as well ? then you are mad indeed , if you be no better in your wits than a fool .

They have here propertied me ; keep me in darkness , send ministers to me , asses ! and do all they can to face me out of my wits .

Advise you what you say : the minister is here . Malvolio , Malvolio , thy wits the heavens restore ! endeavour thyself to sleep , and leave thy vain bibble-babble .

Sir Topas !

Maintain no words with him , good fellow .Who , I , sir ? not I , sir . God be wi' you , good Sir Topas . Marry , amen . I will , sir , I will .

Fool , fool , fool , I say !

Alas , sir , be patient . What say you , sir ? I am shent for speaking to you .

Good fool , help me to some light and some paper : I tell thee I am as well in my wits as any man in Illyria .

Well-a-day , that you were , sir !

By this hand , I am . Good fool , some ink , paper , and light ; and convey what I will set down to my lady : it shall advantage thee more than ever the bearing of letter did .

I will help you to't . But tell me true , are you not mad indeed ? or do you but counterfeit ?

Believe me , I am not : I tell thee true .

Nay , I'll ne'er believe a madman till I see his brains . I will fetch you light and paper and ink .

Fool , I'll requite it in the highest degree : I prithee , be gone .


I am gone , sir ,
And anon , sir ,
I'll be with you again 
In a trice ,
Like to the old Vice ,
Your need to sustain ;
Who with dagger of lath ,
In his rage and his wrath ,
Cries , Ah , ah ! to the devil :
Like a mad lad ,
Pare thy nails , dad ;
Adieu , goodman drivel .

This is the air ; that is the glorious sun ; This pearl she gave me , I do feel't and see't ;
And though 'tis wonder that enwraps me thus ,
Yet 'tis not madness . Where's Antonio then ?
I could not find him at the Elephant ;
Yet there he was , and there I found this credit ,
That he did range the town to seek me out .
His counsel now might do me golden service ;
For though my soul disputes well with my sense 
That this may be some error , but no madness ,
Yet doth this accident and flood of fortune 
So far exceed all instance , all discourse ,
That I am ready to distrust mine eyes ,
And wrangle with my reason that persuades me 
To any other trust but that I am mad 
Or else the lady's mad : yet , if 'twere so ,
She could not sway her house , command her followers ,
Take and give back affairs and their dispatch 
With such a smooth , discreet , and stable bearing 
As I perceive she does . There's something in't 
That is deceivable . But here the lady comes .


Blame not this haste of mine . If you mean well ,
Now go with me and with this holy man 
Into the chantry by ; there , before him ,
And underneath that consecrated roof ,
Plight me the full assurance of your faith ;
That my most jealous and too doubtful soul 
May live at peace . He shall conceal it 
Whiles you are willing it shall come to note ,
What time we will our celebration keep 
According to my birth . What do you say ?

I'll follow this good man , and go with you ;
And , having sworn truth , ever will be true .

Then lead the way , good father ; and heavens so shine 
That they may fairly note this act of mine !


Now , as thou lovest me , let me see his letter .

Good Master Fabian , grant me another request .

Anything .

Do not desire to see this letter .

This is , to give a dog , and , in recompense desire my dog again .


Belong you to the Lady Olivia , friends ?

Ay , sir ; we are some of her trappings .

I know thee well : how dost thou , my good fellow ?

Truly , sir , the better for my foes and the worse for my friends .

Just the contrary ; the better for thy friends .

No , sir , the worse .

How can that be ?

Marry , sir , they praise me and make an ass of me ; now my foes tell me plainly I am an ass : so that by my foes , sir , I profit in the knowledge of myself , and by my friends I am abused : so that , conclusions to be as kisses , if your four negatives make your two affirmatives , why then , the worse for my friends and the better for my foes .

Why , this is excellent .

By my troth , sir , no ; though it please you to be one of my friends .

Thou shalt not be the worse for me : there's gold .

But that it would be double-dealing , sir , I would you could make it another .

O , you give me ill counsel .

Put your grace in your pocket , sir , for this once , and let your flesh and blood obey it .

Well , I will be so much a sinner to be a double-dealer : there's another .

Primo , secundo , tertio , is a good play ; and the old saying is , 'the third pays for all :' the triplex , sir , is a good tripping measure ; or the bells of Saint Bennet , sir , may put you in mind ; one , two , three .

You can fool no more money out of me at this throw : if you will let your lady know I am here to speak with her , and bring her along with you , it may awake my bounty further .

Marry , sir , lullaby to your bounty till I come again . I go , sir ; but I would not have you to think that my desire of having is the sin of covetousness ; but as you say , sir , let your bounty take a nap , I will awake it anon .


Here comes the man , sir , that did rescue me .


That face of his I do remember well ;
Yet when I saw it last , it was besmear'd 
As black as Vulcan in the smoke of war .
A bawbling vessel was he captain of ,
For shallow draught and hulk unprizable ;
With which such scathful grapple did he make 
With the most noble bottom of our fleet ,
That very envy and the tongue of loss 
Cried fame and honour on him . What's the matter ?

Orsino , this is that Antonio 
That took the Ph nix and her fraught from Candy ;
And this is he that did the Tiger board ,
When your young nephew Titus lost his leg .
Here in the streets , desperate of shame and state ,
In private brabble did we apprehend him .

He did me kindness , sir , drew on my side ;
But in conclusion put strange speech upon me :
I know not what 'twas but distraction .

Notable pirate ! thou salt-water thief !
What foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies 
Whom thou , in terms so bloody and so dear ,
Hast made thine enemies ?

Orsino , noble sir ,
Be pleas'd that I shake off these names you give me :
Antonio never yet was thief or pirate ,
Though I confess , on base and ground enough ,
Orsino's enemy . A witchcraft drew me hither :
That most ingrateful boy there by your side ,
From the rude sea's enrag'd and foamy mouth 
Did I redeem ; a wrack past hope he was :
His life I gave him , and did thereto add 
My love , without retention or restraint ,
All his in dedication ; for his sake 
Did I expose myself , pure for his love ,
Into the danger of this adverse town ;
Drew to defend him when he was beset :
Where being apprehended , his false cunning ,
Not meaning to partake with me in danger ,
Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance ,
And grew a twenty years removed thing 
While one would wink , denied me mine own purse ,
Which I had recommended to his use 
Not half an hour before .

How can this be ?

When came he to this town ?

To-day , my lord ; and for three months before ,
No interim , not a minute's vacancy ,
Both day and night did we keep company .


Here comes the countess : now heaven walks on earth !
But for thee , fellow ; fellow , thy words are madness :
Three months this youth hath tended upon me ;
But more of that anon . Take him aside .

What would my lord , but that he may not have ,
Wherein Olivia may seem serviceable ?
Cesario , you do not keep promise with me .

Madam !

Gracious Olivia .

What do you say , Cesario ? Good my lord ,

My lord would speak ; my duty hushes me .

If it be aught to the old tune , my lord ,
It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear 
As howling after music .

Still so cruel ?

Still so constant , lord .

What , to perverseness ? you uncivil lady ,
To whose ingrate and unauspicious altars 
My soul the faithfull'st offerings hath breath'd out 
That e'er devotion tender'd ! What shall I do ?

Even what it please my lord , that shall become him .

Why should I not , had I the heart to do it ,
Like to the Egyptian thief at point of death ,
Kill what I love ? a savage jealousy 
That sometimes savours nobly . But hear me this :
Since you to non-regardance cast my faith ,
And that I partly know the instrument 
That screws me from my true place in your favour ,
Live you , the marble-breasted tyrant still ;
But this your minion , whom I know you love ,
And whom , by heaven I swear , I tender dearly ,
Him will I tear out of that cruel eye ,
Where he sits crowned in his master's spite .
Come , boy , with me ; my thoughts are ripe in mischief ;
I'll sacrifice the lamb that I do love ,
To spite a raven's heart within a dove .


And I , most jocund , apt , and willingly ,
To do you rest , a thousand deaths would die .


Where goes Cesario ?

After him I love 
More than I love these eyes , more than my life ,
More , by all mores , than e'er I shall love wife .
If I do feign , you witnesses above 
Punish my life for tainting of my love !

Ah me , detested ! how am I beguil'd !

Who does beguile you ? who does do you wrong ?

Hast thou forgot thyself ? Is it so long ?
Call forth the holy father .


Come away .

Whither , my lord ? Cesario , husband , stay .

Husband ?

Ay , husband : can he that deny ?

Her husband , sirrah ?

No , my lord , not I .

Alas ! it is the baseness of thy fear 
That makes thee strangle thy propriety .
Fear not , Cesario ; take thy fortunes up ;
Be that thou know'st thou art , and then thou art 
As great as that thou fear'st .


O , welcome , father !
Father , I charge thee , by thy reverence ,
Here to unfold ,though lately we intended 
To keep in darkness what occasion now 
Reveals before 'tis ripe ,what thou dost know 

Hath newly pass'd between this youth and me .

A contract of eternal bond of love ,
Confirm'd by mutual joinder of your hands ,
Attested by the holy close of lips ,
Strengthen'd by interchangement of your rings ;
And all the ceremony of this compact 
Seal'd in my function , by my testimony :
Since when , my watch hath told me , toward my grave 
I have travell'd but two hours .

O , thou dissembling cub ! what wilt thou be 
When time hath sow'd a grizzle on thy case ?
Or will not else thy craft so quickly grow 
That thine own trip shall be thine overthrow ?
Farewell , and take her ; but direct thy feet 
Where thou and I henceforth may never meet .

My lord , I do protest ,

O ! do not swear :
Hold little faith , though thou hast too much fear .


For the love of God , a surgeon ! send one presently to Sir Toby .

What's the matter ?

He has broke my head across , and has given Sir Toby a bloody coxcomb too . For the love of God , your help ! I had rather than forty pound I were at home .

Who has done this , Sir Andrew ?

The count's gentleman , one Cesario : we took him for a coward , but he's the very devil incardinate .

My gentleman , Cesario ?

Od's lifelings ! here he is . You broke my head for nothing ! and that that I did , I was set on to do't by Sir Toby .

Why do you speak to me ? I never hurt you :
You drew your sword upon me without cause ;
But I bespake you fair , and hurt you not .

If a bloody coxcomb be a hurt , you have hurt me : I think you set nothing by a bloody coxcomb . Here comes Sir Toby halting ;

you shall hear more : but if he had not been in drink he would have tickled you othergates than he did .

How now , gentleman ! how is't with you ?

That's all one : he has hurt me , and there's the end on't . Sot , didst see Dick surgeon , sot ?

O ! he's drunk , Sir Toby , an hour agone : his eyes were set at eight i' the morning .

Then he's a rogue , and a passy-measures pavin . I hate a drunken rogue .

Away with him ! Who hath made this havoc with them ?

I'll help you , Sir Toby , because we'll be dressed together .

Will you help ? an ass-head and a coxcomb and a knave , a thin-faced knave , a gull !

Get him to bed , and let his hurt be look'd to .

I am sorry , madam , I have hurt your kinsman ;
But , had it been the brother of my blood ,
I must have done no less with wit and safety .
You throw a strange regard upon me , and by that 
I do perceive it hath offended you :
Pardon me , sweet one , even for the vows 
We made each other but so late ago .

One face , one voice , one habit , and two persons ;
A natural perspective , that is , and is not !

Antonio ! O my dear Antonio !
How have the hours rack'd and tortur'd me 
Since I have lost thee !

Sebastian are you ?

Fear'st thou that , Antonio ?

How have you made division of yourself ?
An apple cleft in two is not more twin 
Than these two creatures . Which is Sebastian ?

Most wonderful !

Do I stand there ? I never had a brother ;
Nor can there be that deity in my nature ,
Of here and every where . I had a sister ,
Whom the blind waves and surges have devour'd .
Of charity , what kin are you to me ?
What countryman ? what name ? what parentage ?

Of Messaline : Sebastian was my father ;
Such a Sebastian was my brother too ,
So went he suited to his watery tomb .
If spirits can assume both form and suit 
You come to fright us .

A spirit I am indeed ;
But am in that dimension grossly clad 
Which from the womb I did participate .
Were you a woman , as the rest goes even ,
I should my tears let fall upon your cheek ,
And say , 'Thrice welcome , drowned Viola !' 

My father had a mole upon his brow .

And so had mine .

And died that day when Viola from her birth 
Had number'd thirteen years .

O ! that record is lively in my soul .
He finished indeed his mortal act 
That day that made my sister thirteen years .

If nothing lets to make us happy both 
But this my masculine usurp'd attire ,
Do not embrace me till each circumstance 
Of place , time , fortune , do cohere and jump 
That I am Viola : which to confirm ,
I'll bring you to a captain in this town ,
Where lie my maiden weeds : by whose gentle help 
I was preserv'd to serve this noble count .
All the occurrence of my fortune since 
Hath been between this lady and this lord .

So comes it , lady , you have been mistook :
But nature to her bias drew in that .
You would have been contracted to a maid ;
Nor are you therein , by my life , deceiv'd ,
You are betroth'd both to a maid and man .

Be not amaz'd ; right noble is his blood .
If this be so , as yet the glass seems true ,
I shall have share in this most happy wrack .


Boy , thou hast said to me a thousand times 
Thou never shouldst love woman like to me .

And all those sayings will I over-swear ,
And all those swearings keep as true in soul 
As doth that orbed continent the fire 
That severs day from night .

Give me thy hand ;
And let me see thee in thy woman's weeds .

The captain that did bring me first on shore 
Hath my maid's garments : he upon some action 
Is now in durance at Malvolio's suit ,
A gentleman and follower of my lady's .

He shall enlarge him . Fetch Malvolio hither .
And yet , alas , now I remember me ,
They say , poor gentleman , he's much distract .
A most extracting frenzy of mine own 
From my remembrance clearly banish'd his .

How does he , sirrah ?

Truly , madam , he holds Belzebub at the stave's end as well as a man in his case may do . He has here writ a letter to you : I should have given it to you to-day morning ; but as a madman's epistles are no gospels , so it skills not much when they are delivered .

Open it , and read it .

Look then to be well edified , when the fool delivers the madman .
By the Lord , madam ,

How now ! art thou mad ?

No , madam , I do but read madness : an your ladyship will have it as it ought to be , you must allow vox .

Prithee , read i' thy right wits .

So I do , madonna ; but to read his right wits is to read thus : therefore perpend , my princess , and give ear .

Read it you , sirrah .


By the Lord , madam , you wrong me , and the world shall know it : though you have put me into darkness , and given your drunken cousin rule over me , yet have I the benefit of my senses as well as your ladyship . I have your own letter that induced me to the semblance I put on ; with the which I doubt not but to do myself much right , or you much shame . Think of me as you please . I leave my duty a little unthought of , and speak out of my injury . THE MADLY-USED MALVOLIO .

Did he write this ?

Ay , madam .

This savours not much of distraction .

See him deliver'd , Fabian ; bring him hither .

My lord , so please you , these things further thought on ,
To think me as well a sister as a wife ,
One day shall crown the alliance on't , so please you ,
Here at my house and at my proper cost .

Madam , I am most apt to embrace your offer .


Your master quits you ; and , for your service done him ,
So much against the mettle of your sex ,
So far beneath your soft and tender breeding ;
And since you call'd me master for so long ,
Here is my hand : you shall from this time be 
Your master's mistress .

A sister ! you are she .


Is this the madman ?

Ay , my lord , this same .
How now , Malvolio !

Madam , you have done me wrong ,
Notorious wrong .

Have I , Malvolio ? no .

Lady , you have . Pray you peruse that letter .
You must not now deny it is your hand :
Write from it , if you can , in hand or phrase ,
Or say 'tis not your seal nor your invention :
You can say none of this . Well , grant it then ,
And tell me , in the modesty of honour ,
Why you have given me such clear lights of favour ,
Bade me come smiling and cross-garter'd to you ,
To put on yellow stockings , and to frown 
Upon Sir Toby and the lighter people ;
And , acting this in an obedient hope ,
Why have you suffer'd me to be imprison'd ,
Kept in a dark house , visited by the priest ,
And made the most notorious geck and gull 
That e'er invention play'd on ? tell me why .

Alas ! Malvolio , this is not my writing ,
Though , I confess , much like the character ;
But , out of question , 'tis Maria's hand :
And now I do bethink me , it was she 
First told me thou wast mad ; then cam'st in smiling ,
And in such forms which here were presuppos'd 
Upon thee in the letter . Prithee , be content :
This practice hath most shrewdly pass'd upon thee ;
But when we know the grounds and authors of it ,
Thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge 
Of thine own cause .

Good madam , hear me speak ,
And let no quarrel nor no brawl to come 
Taint the condition of this present hour ,
Which I have wonder'd at . In hope it shall not ,
Most freely I confess , myself and Toby 
Set this device against Malvolio here ,
Upon some stubborn and uncourteous parts 
We had conceiv'd against him . Maria writ 
The letter at Sir Toby's great importance ;
In recompense whereof he hath married her .
How with a sportful malice it was follow'd ,
May rather pluck on laughter than revenge ,
If that the injuries be justly weigh'd 
That have on both sides past .

Alas , poor fool , how have they baffled thee !

Why , 'some are born great , some achieve greatness , and some have greatness thrown upon them .' I was one , sir , in this interlude ; one Sir Topas , sir ; but that's all one . 'By the Lord , fool , I am not mad :' But do you remember ? 'Madam , why laugh you at such a barren rascal ? an you smile not , he's gagged :' and thus the whirligig of time brings in his revenges .

I'll be reveng'd on the whole pack of you .


He hath been most notoriously abus'd .

Pursue him , and entreat him to a peace ;
He hath not told us of the captain yet :
When that is known and golden time convents ,
A solemn combination shall be made 
Of our dear souls . Meantime , sweet sister ,
We will not part from hence . Cesario , come ;
For so you shall be , while you are a man ;
But when in other habits you are seen ,
Orsino's mistress , and his fancy's queen .

When that I was and a little tiny boy ,
With hey , ho , the wind and the rain ;
A foolish thing was but a toy ,
For the rain it raineth every day .


But when I came to man's estate ,
With hey , ho , the wind and the rain ;
'Gainst knaves and thieves men shut their gates ,
For the rain it raineth every day .


But when I came , alas ! to wive ,
With hey , ho , the wind and the rain ;
By swaggering could I never thrive ,
For the rain it raineth every day .


But when I came unto my beds ,
With hey , ho , the wind and the rain ;
With toss-pots still had drunken heads ,
For the rain it raineth every day .


A great while ago the world begun ,
With hey , ho , the wind and the rain ;
But that's all one , our play is done ,
And we'll strive to please you every day .

 THE FAMOUS HISTORY OF THE LIFE OF KING HENRY VIII

 
I come no more to make you laugh : things now ,
That bear a weighty and a serious brow ,
Sad , high , and working , full of state and woe ,
Such noble scenes as draw the eye to flow ,
We now present . Those that can pity , here 
May , if they think it well , let fall a tear ;
The subject will deserve it . Such as give 
Their money out of hope they may believe ,
May here find truth too . Those that come to see 
Only a show or two , and so agree 
The play may pass , if they be still and willing ,
I'll undertake may see away their shilling 
Richly in two short hours . Only they 
That come to hear a merry , bawdy play ,
A noise of targets , or to see a fellow 
In a long molley coat guarded with yellow ,
Will be deceiv'd ; for , gentle hearers , know ,
To rank our chosen truth with such a show 
As fool and fight is , besides forfeiting 
Our own brains , and the opinion that we bring ,
To make that only true we now intend ,
Will leave us never an understanding friend .
Therefore , for goodness' sake , and as you are known 
The first and happiest hearers of the town ,
Be sad , as we would make ye : think ye see 
The very persons of our noble story 
As they were living ; think you see them great ,
And follow'd with the general throng and sweat 
Of thousand friends ; then , in a moment see 
How soon this mightiness meets misery :
And if you can be merry then , I'll say 
A man may weep upon his wedding day .


Good morrow , and well met . How have you done ,
Since last we saw in France ?

I thank your Grace ,
Healthful ; and ever since a fresh admirer 
Of what I saw there .

An untimely ague 
Stay'd me a prisoner in my chamber , when 
Those suns of glory , those two lights of men ,
Met in the vale of Andren .

'Twixt Guynes and Arde :
I was then present , saw them salute on horseback ;
Beheld them , when they lighted , how they clung 
In their embracement , as they grew together ;
Which had they , what four thron'd ones could have weigh'd 
Such a compounded one ?

All the whole time 
I was my chamber's prisoner .

Then you lost 
The view of earthly glory : men might say ,
Till this time , pomp was single , but now married 
To one above itself . Each following day 
Became the next day's master , till the last 
Made former wonders its . To-day the French 
All clinquant , all in gold , like heathen gods ,
Shone down the English ; and to-morrow they 
Made Britain India : every man that stood 
Show'd like a mine . Their dwarfish pages were 
As cherubins , all gilt : the madams , too ,
Not us'd to toil , did almost sweat to bear 
The pride upon them , that their very labour 
Was to them as a painting . Now this masque 
Was cried incomparable ; and the ensuing night 
Made it a fool , and beggar . The two kings ,
Equal in lustre , were now best , now worst ,
As presence did present them ; him in eye ,
Still him in praise ; and , being present both ,
'Twas said they saw but one ; and no discerner 
Durst wag his tongue in censure . When these suns 
For so they phrase 'em by their heralds challeng'd 
The noble spirits to arms , they did perform 
Beyond thought's compass ; that former fabulous story ,
Being now seen possible enough , got credit ,
That Bevis was believ'd .

O ! you go far .

As I belong to worship , and affect 
In honour honesty , the tract of every thing 
Would by a good discourser lose some life ,
Which action's self was tongue to . All was royal ;
To the disposing of it nought rebell'd ,
Order gave each thing view ; the office did 
Distinctly his full function .

Who did guide ,
I mean , who set the body and the limbs 
Of this great sport together , as you guess ?

One certes , that promises no element 
In such a business .

I pray you , who , my lord ?

All this was order'd by the good discretion 
Of the right reverend Cardinal of York .

The devil speed him ! no man's pie is freed 
From his ambitious finger . What had he 
To do in these fierce vanities ? I wonder 
That such a keech can with his very bulk 
Take up the rays o' the beneficial sun ,
And keep it from the earth .

Surely , sir ,
There's in him stuff that puts him to these ends ;
For , being not propp'd by ancestry , whose grace 
Chalks successors their way , nor call'd upon 
For high feats done to the crown ; neither allied 
To eminent assistants ; but , spider-like ,
Out of his self-drawing web , he gives us note ,
The force of his own merit makes his way ;
A gift that heaven gives for him , which buys 
A place next to the king .

I cannot tell 
What heaven hath given him : let some graver eye 
Pierce into that ; but I can see his pride 
Peep through each part of him : whence has he that ?
If not from hell , the devil is a niggard ,
Or has given all before , and he begins 
A new hell in himself .

Why the devil ,
Upon this French going-out , took he upon him ,
Without the privity o' the king , to appoint 
Who should attend on him ? He makes up the file 
Of all the gentry ; for the most part such 
To whom as great a charge as little honour 
He meant to lay upon : and his own letter ,
The honourable board of council out ,
Must fetch him in he papers .

I do know 
Kinsmen of mine , three at the least , that have 
By this so sicken'd their estates , that never 
They shall abound as formerly .

O ! many 
Have broke their backs with laying manors on 'em 
For this great journey . What did this vanity 
But minister communication of 
A most poor issue ?

Grievingly I think ,
The peace between the French and us not values 
The cost that did conclude it .

Every man ,
After the hideous storm that follow'd , was 
A thing inspir'd ; and , not consulting , broke 
Into a general prophecy : That this tempest ,
Dashing the garment of this peace , aboded 
The sudden breach on't .

Which is budded out ;
For France hath flaw'd the league , and hath attach'd 
Our merchants' goods at Bourdeaux .

Is it therefore 
The ambassador is silenc'd ?

Marry , is't .

A proper title of a peace ; and purchas'd 
At a superfluous rate !

Why , all this business 
Our reverend cardinal carried .

Like it your Grace ,
The state takes notice of the private difference 
Betwixt you and the cardinal . I advise you ,
And take it from a heart that wishes towards you 
Honour and plenteous safety ,that you read 
The cardinal's malice and his potency 
Together ; to consider further that 
What his high hatred would effect wants not 
A minister in his power . You know his nature ,
That he's revengeful ; and I know his sword 
Hath a sharp edge : it's long , and 't may be said ,
It reaches far ; and where 'twill not extend ,
Thither he darts it . Bosom up my counsel ,
You'll find it wholesome . Lo where comes that rock 
That I advise your shunning .

The Duke of Buckingham's surveyor , ha ?
Where's his examination ?

Here , so please you .

Is he in person ready ?

Ay , please your Grace .

Well , we shall then know more ; and Buckingham 
Shall lessen this big look .


This butcher's cur is venom-mouth'd , and I 
Have not the power to muzzle him ; therefore best 
Not wake him in his slumber . A beggar's book 
Outworths a noble's blood .

What ! are you chaf'd ?
Ask God for temperance ; that's the appliance only 
Which your disease requires .

I read in's looks 
Matter against me ; and his eye revil'd 
Me , as his abject object : at this instant 
He bores me with some trick : he's gone to the king ;
I'll follow , and out-stare him .

Stay , my lord ,
And let your reason with your choler question 
What 'tis you go about . To climb steep hills 
Requires slow pace at first : anger is like 
A full-hot horse , who being allow'd his way ,
Self-mettle tires him . Not a man in England 
Can advise me like you : be to yourself 
As you would to your friend .

I'll to the king ;
And from a mouth of honour quite cry down 
This Ipswich fellow's insolence , or proclaim 
There's difference in no persons .

Be advis'd ;
Heat not a furnace for your foe so hot 
That it do singe yourself . We may outrun 
By violent swiftness that which we run at ,
And lose by overrunning . Know you not ,
The fire that mounts the liquor till it run o'er ,
In seeming to augment it wastes it ? Be advis'd :
I say again , there is no English soul 
More stronger to direct you than yourself ,
If with the sap of reason you would quench ,
Or but allay , the fire of passion .

Sir ,
I am thankful to you , and I'll go along 
By your prescription : but this top-proud fellow 
Whom from the flow of gall I name not , but 
From sincere motions ,by intelligence ,
And proofs as clear as founts in July , when 
We see each grain of gravel ,I do know 
To be corrupt and treasonous .

Say not , 'treasonous .' 

To the king I'll say't ; and make my vouch as strong 
As shore of rock . Attend . This holy fox ,
Or wolf , or both ,for he is equal ravenous 
As he is subtle , and as prone to mischief 
As able to perform 't , his mind and place 
Infecting one another , yea , reciprocally ,
Only to show his pomp as well in France 
As here at home , suggests the king our master 
To this last costly treaty , the interview ,
That swallow'd so much treasure , and like a glass 
Did break i' the rinsing .

Faith , and so it did .

Praygive me favour , sir . This cunning cardinal 
The articles o' the combination drew 
As himself pleas'd ; and they were ratified 
As he cried , 'Thus let be ,' to as much end 
As give a crutch to the dead . But our count-cardinal 
Has done this , and 'tis well ; for worthy Wolsey ,
Who cannot err , he did it . Now this follows ,
Which , as I take it , is a kind of puppy 
To the old dam , treason , Charles the emperor ,
Under pretence to see the queen his aunt ,
For 'twas indeed his colour , but he came 
To whisper Wolsey ,here makes visitation :
His fears were , that the interview betwixt 
England and France might , through their amity ,
Breed him some prejudice ; for from this league 
Peep'd harms that menac'd him . He privily 
Deals with our cardinal , and , as I trow ,
Which I do well ; for , I am sure the emperor 
Paid ere he promis'd ; whereby his suit was granted 
Ere it was ask'd ; but when the way was made ,
And pav'd with gold , the emperor thus desir'd :
That he would please to alter the king's course ,
And break the foresaid peace . Let the king know 
As soon he shall by me that thus the cardinal 
Does buy and sell his honour as he pleases ,
And for his own advantage .

I am sorry 
To hear this of him ; and could wish he were 
Something mistaken in 't .

No , not a syllable :
I do pronounce him in that very shape 
He shall appear in proof .


Your office , sergeant ; execute it .

Sir ,
My Lord the Duke of Buckingham , and Earl 
Of Hereford , Stafford , and Northampton , I 
Arrest thee of high treason , in the name 
Of our most sovereign king .

Lo you , my lord ,
The net has fall'n upon me ! I shall perish 
Under device and practice .

I am sorry 
To see you ta'en from liberty , to look on 
The business present . 'Tis his highness' pleasure 
You shall to the Tower .

It will help me nothing 
To plead mine innocence , for that dye is on me 
Which makes my whit'st part black . The will of heaven 
Be done in this and all things ! I obey .
O ! my Lord Abergavenny , fare you well !

Nay , he must bear you company .

The king 
Is pleas'd you shall to the Tower , till you know 
How he determines further .

As the duke said ,
The will of heaven be done , and the king's pleasure 
By me obey'd !

Here is a warrant from 
The king to attach Lord Montacute ; and the bodies 
Of the duke's confessor , John de la Car ,
One Gilbert Peck , his chancellor ,

So , so ;
These are the limbs o' the plot : no more , I hope .

A monk o' the Chartreux .

O ! Nicholas Hopkins ?

He .

My surveyor is false ; the o'er-great cardinal 
Hath show'd him gold . My life is spann'd already :
I am the shadow of poor Buckingham ,
Whose figure even this instant cloud puts on ,
By dark'ning my clear sun . My lord , farewell .


My life itself , and the best heart of it ,
Thanks you for this great care : I stood i' the level 
Of a full-charg'd confederacy , and give thanks 
To you that chok'd it . Let be call'd before us 
That gentleman of Buckingham's ; in person 
I'll hear him his confessions justify ;
And point by point the treasons of his master 
He shall again relate .

Nay , we must longer kneel : I am a suitor .

Arise , and take place by us : half your suit 
Never name to us ; you have half our power :
The other moiety , ere you ask , is given ;
Repeat your will , and take it .

Thank your majesty .
That you would love yourself , and in that love 
Not unconsider'd leave your honour , nor 
The dignity of your office , is the point 
Of my petition .

Lady mine , proceed .

I am solicited , not by a few ,
And those of true condition , that your subjects 
Are in great grievance : there have been commissions 
Sent down among 'em , which hath flaw'd the heart 
Of all their loyalties : wherein , although ,
My good Lord Cardinal , they vent reproaches 
Most bitterly on you , as putter-on 
Of these exactions , yet the king our master ,
Whose honour heaven shield from soil !even he escapes not 
Language unmannerly ; yea , such which breaks 
The sides of loyalty , and almost appears 
In loud rebellion .

Not almost appears ,
It doth appear ; for , upon these taxations ,
The clothiers all , not able to maintain 
The many to them 'longing , have put off 
The spinsters , carders , fullers , weavers , who ,
Unfit for other life , compell'd by hunger 
And lack of other means , in desperate manner 
Daring the event to the teeth , are all in uproar ,
And danger serves among them .

Taxation !
Wherein ? and what taxation ? My Lord Cardinal ,
You that are blam'd for it alike with us ,
Know you of this taxation ?

Please you , sir ,
I know but of a single part in aught 
Pertains to the state ; and front but in that file 
Where others tell steps with me .

No , my lord ,
You know no more than others ; but you frame 
Things that are known alike ; which are not wholesome 
To those which would not know them , and yet must 
Perforce be their acquaintance . These exactions ,
Whereof my sov'reign would have note , they are 
Most pestilent to the hearing ; and to bear 'em ,
The back is sacrifice to the load . They say 
They are devis'd by you , or else you suffer 
Too hard an exclamation .

Still exaction !
The nature of it ? In what kind , let's know ,
Is this exaction ?

I am much too venturous 
In tempting of your patience ; but am bolden'd 
Under your promis'd pardon . The subjects' grief 
Comes through commissions , which compel from each 
The sixth part of his substance , to be levied 
Without delay ; and the pretence for this 
Is nam'd , your wars in France . This makes bold mouths :
Tongues spit their duties out , and cold hearts freeze 
Allegiance in them ; their curses now 
Live where their prayers did ; and it's come to pass ,
This tractable obedience is a slave 
To each incensed will . I would your highness 
Would give it quick consideration , for 
There is no primer business .

By my life ,
This is against our pleasure .

And for me ,
I have no further gone in this than by 
A single voice , and that not pass'd me but 
By learned approbation of the judges . If I am 
Traduc'd by ignorant tongues , which neither know 
My faculties nor person , yet will be 
The chronicles of my doing , let me say 
'Tis but the fate of place , and the rough brake 
That virtue must go through . We must not stint 
Our necessary actions , in the fear 
To cope malicious censurers ; which ever ,
As rav'nous fishes , do a vessel follow 
That is new-trimm'd , but benefit no further 
Than vainly longing . What we oft do best ,
By sick interpreters , once weak ones , is 
Not ours , or not allow'd ; what worst , as oft ,
Hitting a grosser quality , is cried up 
For our best act . If we shall stand still ,
In fear our motion will be mock'd or carp'd at ,
We should take root here where we sit , or sit 
State-statues only .

Things done well ,
And with a care , exempt themselves from fear ;
Things done without example , in their issue 
Are to be fear'd . Have you a precedent 
Of this commission ? I believe , not any .
We must not rend our subjects from our laws ,
And stick them in our will . Sixth part of each ?
A trembling contribution ! Why , we take 
From every tree , lop , bark , and part o' the timber ;
And , though we leave it with a root , thus hack'd ,
The air will drink the sap . To every county 
Where this is question'd , send our letters , with 
Free pardon to each man that has denied 
The force of this commission . Pray , look to 't ;
I put it to your care .

A word with you .
Let there be letters writ to every shire ,
Of the king's grace and pardon . The griev'd commons 
Hardly conceive of me ; let it be nois'd 
That through our intercession this revokement 
And pardon comes : I shall anon advise you 
Further in the proceeding .

I am sorry that the Duke of Buckingham 
Is run in your displeasure .

It grieves many :
The gentleman is learn'd , and a most rare speaker ,
To nature none more bound ; his training such 
That he may furnish and instruct great teachers ,
And never seek for aid out of himself . Yet see ,
When these so noble benefits shall prove 
Not well dispos'd , the mind growing once corrupt ,
They turn to vicious forms , ten times more ugly 
Than ever they were fair . This man so complete ,
Who was enroll'd 'mongst wonders , and when we ,
Almost with ravish'd listening , could not find 
His hour of speech a minute ; he , my lady ,
Hath into monstrous habits put the graces 
That once were his , and is become as black 
As if besmear'd in hell . Sit by us ; you shall hear 
This was his gentleman in trust of him 
Things to strike honour sad . Bid him recount 
The fore-recited practices ; whereof 
We cannot feel too little , hear too much .

Stand forth ; and with bold spirit relate what you ,
Most like a careful subject , have collected 
Out of the Duke of Buckingham .

Speak freely .

First , it was usual with him , every day 
It would infect his speech , that if the king 
Should without issue die , he'd carry it so 
To make the sceptre his . These very words 
I've heard him utter to his son-in-law ,
Lord Abergavenny , to whom by oath he menac'd 
Revenge upon the cardinal .

Please your highness , note 
This dangerous conception in this point .
Not friended by his wish , to your high person 
His will is most malignant ; and it stretches 
Beyond you , to your friends .

My learn'd Lord Cardinal ,
Deliver all with charity .

Speak on :
How grounded he his title to the crown 
Upon our fail ? to this point hast thou heard him 
At any time speak aught ?

He was brought to this 
By a vain prophecy of Nicholas Hopkins .

What was that Hopkins ?

Sir , a Chartreux friar ,
His confessor , who fed him every minute 
With words of sovereignty .

How know'st thou this ?

Not long before your highness sped to France ,
The duke being at the Rose , within the parish 
Saint Lawrence Poultney , did of me demand 
What was the speech among the Londoners 
Concerning the French journey : I replied ,
Men fear'd the French would prove perfidious ,
To the king's danger . Presently the duke 
Said , 'twas the fear , indeed ; and that he doubted 
'Twould prove the verity of certain words 
Spoke by a holy monk ; 'that oft ,' says he ,
'Hath sent to me , wishing me to permit 
John de la Car , my chaplain , a choice hour 
To hear from him a matter of some moment :
Whom after under the confession's seal 
He solemnly had sworn , that what he spoke ,
My chaplain to no creature living but 
To me should utter , with demure confidence 
This pausingly ensu'd : neither the king nor 's heirs 
Tell you the duke shall prosper : bid him strive 
To gain the love o' the commonalty : the duke 
Shall govern England .' 

If I know you well ,
You were the duke's surveyor , and lost your office 
On the complaint o' the tenants : take good heed 
You charge not in your spleen a noble person ,
And spoil your nobler soul . I say , take heed ;
Yes , heartily beseech you .

Let him on .
Go forward .

On my soul , I'll speak but truth .
I told my lord the duke , by the devil's illusions 
The monk might be deceiv'd ; and that 'twas dangerous for him 
To ruminate on this so far , until 
It forg'd him some design , which , being believ'd ,
It was much like to do . He answer'd , 'Tush !
It can do me no damage ;' adding further ,
That had the king in his last sickness fail'd ,
The cardinal's and Sir Thomas Lovell's heads 
Should have gone off .

Ha ! what , so rank ? Ah , ha !
There's mischief in this man . Canst thou say further ?

I can , my liege .

Proceed .

Being at Greenwich ,
After your highness had reprov'd the duke 
About Sir William Blomer ,

I remember 
Of such a time : being my sworn servant ,
The duke retain'd him his . But on ; what hence ?

'If ,' quoth he , 'I for this had been committed ,
As , to the Tower , I thought , I would have play'd 
The part my father meant to act upon 
The usurper Richard ; who , being at Salisbury ,
Made suit to come in 's presence ; which if granted ,
As he made semblance of his duty , would 
Have put his knife into him .' 

A giant traitor !

Now , madam , may his highness live in freedom ,
And this man out of prison ?

God mend all !

There's something more would out of thee ? what sayst ?

After 'the duke his father ,' with 'the knife ,' 
He stretch'd him , and , with one hand on his dagger ,
Another spread on's breast , mounting his eyes ,
He did discharge a horrible oath ; whose tenour 
Was , were he evil us'd , he would outgo 
His father by as much as a performance 
Does an irresolute purpose .

There's his period ;
To sheathe his knife in us . He is attach'd ;
Call him to present trial : if he may 
Find mercy in the law , 'tis his ; if none ,
Let him not seek't of us : by day and night !
He's traitor to the height .


Is't possible the spells of France should juggle 
Men into such strange mysteries ?

New customs ,
Though they be never so ridiculous ,
Nay , let 'em be unmanly , yet are follow'd .

As far as I see , all the good our English 
Have got by the late voyage is but merely 
A fit or two o' the face ; but they are shrewd ones ;
For when they hold 'em , you would swear directly 
Their very noses had been counsellors 
To Pepin or Clotharius , they keep state so .

They have all new legs , and lame ones : one would take it ,
That never saw 'em pace before , the spavin 
Or springhalt reign'd among 'em .

Death ! my lord ,
Their clothes are after such a pagan cut too ,
That , sure , they've worn out Christendom .


How now !

What news , Sir Thomas Lovell ?

Faith , my lord ,
I hear of none , but the new proclamation 
That's clapp'd upon the court-gate .

What is't for ?

The reformation of our travell'd gallants ,
That fill the court with quarrels , talk , and tailors .

I am glad 'tis there : now I would pray our monsieurs 
To think an English courtier may be wise ,
And never see the Louvre .

They must either 
For so run the conditions leave those remnants 
Of fool and feather that they got in France ,
With all their honourable points of ignorance 
Pertaining thereunto ,as fights and fireworks ;
Abusing better men than they can be ,
Out of a foreign wisdom ;renouncing clean 
The faith they have in tennis and tall stockings ,
Short blister'd breeches , and those types of travel ,
And understand again like honest men ;
Or pack to their old playfellows : there , I take it ,
They may , cum privilegio , wear away 
The lag end of their lewdness , and be laugh'd at .

'Tis time to give 'em physic , their diseases 
Are grown so catching .

What a loss our ladies 
Will have of these trim vanities !

Ay , marry ,
There will be woe indeed , lords : the sly whoresons 
Have got a speeding trick to lay down ladies ;
A French song and a fiddle has no fellow .

The devil fiddle 'em ! I am glad they're going :
For , sure , there's no converting of 'em : now 
An honest country lord , as I am , beaten 
A long time out of play , may bring his plainsong 
And have an hour of hearing ; and , by'r lady ,
Held current music too .

Well said , Lord Sands ;
Your colt's tooth is not cast yet .

No , my lord ;
Nor shall not , while I have a stump .

Sir Thomas ,
Whither were you a-going ?

To the cardinal's :
Your lordship is a guest too .

O ! 'tis true :
This night he makes a supper , and a great one ,
To many lords and ladies ; there will be 
The beauty of this kingdom , I'll assure you .

That churchman bears a bounteous mind indeed ,
A hand as fruitful as the land that feeds us ;
His dews fall everywhere .

No doubt he's noble ;
He had a black mouth that said other of him .

He may , my lord ; he has wherewithal : in him 
Sparing would show a worse sin than ill doctrine :
Men of his way should be most liberal ;
They are set here for examples .

True , they are so ;
But few now give so great ones . My barge stays ;
Your lordship shall along . Come , good Sir Thomas ,
We shall be late else ; which I would not be ,
For I was spoke to , with Sir Henry Guildford ,
This night to be comptrollers .

I am your lordship's .

Ladies , a general welcome from his Grace 
Salutes ye all ; this night he dedicates 
To fair content and you . None here , he hopes ,
In all this noble bevy , has brought with her 
One care abroad ; he would have all as merry 
As , first , good company , good wine , good welcome 
Can make good people .

O , my lord ! you're tardy :
The very thought of this fair company 
Clapp'd wings to me .

You are young , Sir Harry Guildford .

Sir Thomas Lovell , had the cardinal 
But half my lay-thoughts in him , some of these 
Should find a running banquet ere they rested ,
I think would better please 'em : by my life ,
They are a sweet society of fair ones .

O ! that your lordship were but now confessor 
To one or two of these !

I would I were ;
They should find easy penance .

Faith , how easy ?

As easy as a down-bed would afford it .

Sweet ladies , will it please you sit ? Sir Harry ,
Place you that side , I'll take the charge of this ;
His Grace is ent'ring . Nay you must not freeze ;
Two women plac'd together makes cold weather :
My Lord Sands , you are one will keep 'em waking ;
Pray , sit between these ladies .

By my faith ,
And thank your lordship . By your leave , sweet ladies :

If I chance to talk a little wild , forgive me ;
I had it from my father .

Was he mad , sir ?

O ! very mad , exceeding mad ; in love too :
But he would bite none ; just as I do now ,
He would kiss you twenty with a breath .


Well said , my lord .
So , now you're fairly seated . Gentlemen ,
The penance lies on you , if these fair ladies 
Pass away frowning .

For my little cure ,
Let me alone .


You're welcome , my fair guests : that noble lady ,
Or gentleman , that is not freely merry ,
Is not my friend : this , to confirm my welcome ;
And to you all , good health .


Your Grace is noble :
Let me have such a bowl may hold my thanks ,
And save me so much talking .

My Lord Sands ,
I am beholding to you : cheer your neighbours .
Ladies , you are not merry : gentlemen ,
Whose fault is this ?

The red wine first must rise 
In their fair cheeks , my lord ; then , we shall have 'em 
Talk us to silence .

You are a merry gamester ,
My Lord Sands .

Yes , if I make my play .
Here's to your ladyship ; and pledge it , madam ,
For 'tis to such a thing ,

You cannot show me .

I told your Grace they would talk anon .


What's that ?

Look out there , some of ye .


What war-like voice ,
And to what end , is this ? Nay , ladies , fear not ;
By all the laws of war you're privileg'd .


How now , what is't ?

A noble troop of strangers ;
For so they seem : they've left their barge and landed ;
And hither make , as great ambassadors 
From foreign princes .

Good Lord Chamberlain ,
Go , give 'em welcome ; you can speak the French tongue ;
And , pray , receive 'em nobly , and conduct 'em 
Into our presence , where this heaven of beauty 
Shall shine at full upon them . Some attend him .

You have now a broken banquet ; but we'll mend it .
A good digestion to you all ; and once more 
I shower a welcome on ye ; welcome all .

A noble company ! what are their pleasures ?

Because they speak no English , thus they pray'd 
To tell your Grace : that , having heard by fame 
Of this so noble and so fair assembly 
This night to meet here , they could do no less ,
Out of the great respect they bear to beauty ,
But leave their flocks ; and , under your fair conduct ,
Crave leave to view these ladies , and entreat 
An hour of revels with 'em .

Say , Lord Chamberlain ,
They have done my poor house grace ; for which I pay 'em 
A thousand thanks , and pray 'em take their pleasures .


The fairest hand I ever touch'd ! O beauty ,
Till now I never knew thee !


My lord .

Your Grace ?

Pray tell them thus much from me :
There should be one amongst 'em , by his person ,
More worthy this place than myself ; to whom ,
If I but knew him , with my love and duty 
I would surrender it .

I will , my lord .


What say they ?

Such a one , they all confess ,
There is , indeed ; which they would have your Grace 
Find out , and he will take it .

Let me see then .

By all your good leaves , gentlemen , here I'll make 
My royal choice .

You have found him , cardinal .
You hold a fair assembly ; you do well , lord :
You are a churchman , or , I'll tell you , cardinal ,
I should judge now unhappily .

I am glad 
Your Grace is grown so pleasant .

My Lord Chamberlain ,
Prithee , come hither . What fair lady's that ?

An't please your Grace , Sir Thomas Bullen's daughter ,
The Viscount Rochford , one of her highness' women .

By heaven , she is a dainty one . Sweetheart ,
I were unmannerly to take you out ,
And not to kiss you . A health , gentlemen !
Let it go round .

Sir Thomas Lovell , is the banquest ready 
I' the privy chamber ?

Yes , my lord .

Your Grace ,
I fear , with dancing is a little heated .

I fear , too much .

There's fresher air , my lord ,
In the next chamber .

Lead in your ladies , every one . Sweet partner ,
I must not yet forsake you . Let's be merry :
Good my Lord Cardinal , I have half a dozen healths 
To drink to these fair ladies , and a measure 
To lead 'em once again ; and then let's dream 
Who's best in favour . Let the music knock it .


Whither away so fast ?

O ! God save ye .
E'en to the hall , to hear what shall become 
Of the great Duke of Buckingham .

I'll save you 
That labour , sir . All's now done but the ceremony 
Of bringing back the prisoner .

Were you there ?

Yes , indeed , was I .

Pray speak what has happen'd .

You may guess quickly what .

Is he found guilty ?

Yes , truly is he , and condemn'd upon't .

I am sorry for 't .

So are a number more .

But , pray , how pass'd it ?

I'll tell you in a little . The great duke 
Came to the bar ; where , to his accusations 
He pleaded still not guilty , and alleg'd 
Many sharp reasons to defeat the law .
The king's attorney on the contrary 
Urg'd on the examinations , proofs , confessions 
Of divers witnesses , which the duke desir'd 
To have brought , viv  voce , to his face :
At which appear'd against him his surveyor ;
Sir Gilbert Peck his chancellor ; and John Car ,
Confessor to him ; with that devil-monk ,
Hopkins , that made this mischief .

That was he 
That fed him with his prophecies ?

The same .
All these accus'd him strongly ; which he fain 
Would have flung from him , but , indeed , he could not :
And so his peers , upon this evidence ,
Have found him guilty of high treason . Much 
He spoke , and learnedly , for life ; but all 
Was either pitied in him or forgotten .

After all this how did he bear himself ?

When he was brought again to the bar , to hear 
His knell rung out , his judgment , he was stirr'd 
With such an agony , he sweat extremely ,
And something spoke in choler , ill , and hasty :
But he fell to himself again , and sweetly 
In all the rest show'd a most noble patience .

I do not think he fears death .

Sure , he does not ;
He never was so womanish ; the cause 
He may a little grieve at .

Certainly 
The cardinal is the end of this .

'Tis likely 
By all conjectures : first , Kildare's attainder ,
Then deputy of Ireland ; who , remov'd ,
Earl Surrey was sent thither , and in haste too ,
Lest he should help his father .

That trick of state 
Was a deep envious one .

At his return ,
No doubt he will requite it . This is noted ,
And generally , whoever the king favours ,
The cardinal instantly will find employment ,
And far enough from court too .

All the commons 
Hate him perniciously , and o' my conscience ,
Wish him ten fathom deep : this duke as much 
They love and dote on ; call him bounteous Buckingham ,
The mirror of all courtesy ;

Stay there , sir ,
And see the noble ruin'd man you speak of .

Let's stand close , and behold him .

All good people ,
You that thus far have come to pity me ,
Hear what I say , and then go home and lose me .
I have this day receiv'd a traitor's judgment ,
And by that name must die : yet , heaven bear witness ,
And if I have a conscience , let it sink me ,
Even as the axe falls , if I be not faithful !
The law I bear no malice for my death ,
'T has done upon the premises but justice ;
But those that sought it I could wish more Christians :
Be what they will , I heartily forgive 'em .
Yet let 'em look they glory not in mischief ,
Nor build their evils on the graves of great men ;
For then my guiltless blood must cry against 'em .
For further life in this world I ne'er hope ,
Nor will I sue , although the king have mercies 
More than I dare make faults . You few that lov'd me ,
And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham ,
His noble friends and fellows , whom to leave 
Is only bitter to him , only dying ,
Go with me , like good angels , to my end ;
And , as the long divorce of steel falls on me ,
Make of your prayers one sweet sacrifice ,
And lift my soul to heaven . Lead on , o' God's name .

I do beseech your Grace , for charity ,
If ever any malice in your heart 
Were hid against me , now to forgive me frankly .

Sir Thomas Lovell , I as free forgive you 
As I would be forgiven : I forgive all .
There cannot be those numberless offences 
'Gainst me that I cannot take peace with : no black envy 
Shall mark my grave . Commend me to his Grace ;
And , if he speak of Buckingham , pray , tell him 
You met him half in heaven . My vows and prayers 
Yet are the king's ; and , till my soul forsake ,
Shall cry for blessings on him : may he live 
Longer than I have time to tell his years !
Ever belov'd and loving may his rule be !
And when old time shall lead him to his end ,
Goodness and he fill up one monument !

To the water side I must conduct your Grace ;
Then give my charge up to Sir Nicholas Vaux ,
Who undertakes you to your end .

Prepare there !
The duke is coming : see the barge be ready ;
And fit it with such furniture as suits 
The greatness of his person .

Nay , Sir Nicholas ,
Let it alone ; my state now will but mock me .
When I came hither , I was Lord High Constable ,
And Duke of Buckingham ; now , poor Edward Bohun :
Yet I am richer than my base accusers ,
That never knew what truth meant : I now seal it ;
And with that blood will make them one day groan for't .
My noble father , Henry of Buckingham ,
Who first rais'd head against usurping Richard ,
Flying for succour to his servant Banister ,
Being distress'd , was by that wretch betray'd ,
And without trial fell : God's peace be with him !
Henry the Seventh succeeding , truly pitying 
My father's loss , like a most royal prince ,
Restor'd me to my honours , and , out of ruins ,
Made my name once more noble . Now his son ,
Henry the Eighth , life , honour , name , and all 
That made me happy , at one stroke has taken 
For ever from the world . I had my trial ,
And , must needs say , a noble one ; which makes me 
A little happier than my wretched father :
Yet thus far we are one in fortunes ; both 
Fell by our servants , by those men welov'd most :
A most unnatural and faithless service !
Heaven has an end in all ; yet , you that hear me ,
This from a dying man receive as certain :
Where you are liberal of your loves and counsels 
Be sure you be not loose ; for those you make friends 
And give your hearts to , when they once perceive 
The least rub in your fortunes , fall away 
Like water from ye , never found again 
But where they mean to sink ye . All good people ,
Pray for me ! I must now forsake ye : the last hour 
Of my long weary life is come upon me .
Farewell :
And when you would say something that is sad ,
Speak how I fell . I have done ; and God forgive me !


O ! this is full of pity ! Sir , it calls ,
I fear , too many curses on their heads 
That were the authors .

If the duke be guiltless ,
'Tis full of woe ; yet I can give you inkling 
Of an ensuing evil , if it fall ,
Greater than this .

Good angels keep it from us !
What may it be ? You do not doubt my faith , sir ?

This secret is so weighty , 'twill require 
A strong faith to conceal it .

Let me have it ;
I do not talk much .

I am confident :
You shall , sir . Did you not of late days hear 
A buzzing of a separation 
Between the king and Katharine ?

Yes , but it held not ;
For when the king once heard it , out of anger 
He sent command to the lord mayor straight 
To stop the rumour , and allay those tongues 
That durst disperse it .

But that slander , sir ,
Is found a truth now ; for it grows again 
Fresher than e'er it was ; and held for certain 
The king will venture at it . Either the cardinal ,
Or some about him near , have , out of malice 
To the good queen , possess'd him with a scruple 
That will undo her : to confirm this too ,
Cardinal Campeius is arriv'd , and lately ;
As all think , for this business .

'Tis the cardinal ;
And merely to revenge him on the emperor 
For not bestowing on him , at his asking ,
The archbishopric of Toledo , this is purpos'd .

I think you have hit the mark : but is't not cruel 
That she should feel the smart of this ? The cardinal 
Will have his will , and she must fall .

'Tis woeful .
We are too open here to argue this ;
Let's think in private more .


My lord , The horses your lordship sent for , with all the care I had , I saw well chosen , ridden , and furnished . They were young and handsome , and of the best breed in the north . When they were ready to set out for London , a man of my Lord Cardinal's , by commission and main power , took them from me ; with this reason : His master would be served before a subject , if not before the king ; which stopped our mouths , sir .
I fear he will indeed . Well , let him have them :
He will have all , I think .


Well met , my Lord Chamberlain .

Good day to both your Graces .

How is the king employ'd ?

I left him private ,
Full of sad thoughts and troubles .

What's the cause ?

It seems the marriage with his brother's wife 
Has crept too near his conscience .

No ; his conscience 
Has crept too near another lady .

'Tis so :
This is the cardinal's doing , the king-cardinal :
That blind priest , like the eldest son of Fortune ,
Turns what he list . The king will know him one day .

Pray God he do ! he'll never know himself else .

How holily he works in all his business ,
And with what zeal ! for , now he has crack'd the league 
Between us and the emperor , the queen's great nephew ,
He dives into the king's soul , and there scatters 
Dangers , doubts , wringing of the conscience ,
Fears , and despairs ; and all these for his marriage :
And out of all these , to restore the king ,
He counsels a divorce ; a loss of her ,
That like a jewel has hung twenty years 
About his neck , yet never lost her lustre ;
Of her , that loves him with that excellence 
That angels love good men with ; even of her ,
That , when the greatest stroke of fortune falls ,
Will bless the king : and is not this course pious ?

Heaven keep me from such counsel ! 'Tis most true 
These news are every where ; every tongue speaks 'em ,
And every true heart weeps for't . All that dare 
Look into these affairs , see this main end ,
The French king's sister . Heaven will one day open 
The king's eyes , that so long have slept upon 
This bold bad man .

And free us from his slavery .

We had need pray ,
And heartily , for our deliverance ;
Or this imperious man will work us all 
From princes into pages . All men's honours 
Lie like one lump before him , to be fashion'd 
Into what pitch he please .

For me , my lords ,
I love him not , nor fear him ; there's my creed .
As I am made without him , so I'll stand ,
If the king please ; his curses and his blessings 
Touch me alike , they're breath I not believe in .
I knew him , and I know him ; so I leave him 
To him that made him proud , the pope .

Let's in ;
And with some other business put the king 
From these sad thoughts , that work too much upon him .
My lord , you'll bear us company ?

Excuse me ;
The king hath sent me otherwhere : besides ,
You'll find a most unfit time to disturb him :
Health to your lordships .

Thanks , my good Lord Chamberlain .

How sad he looks ! sure , he is much afflicted .

Who is there , ha ?

Pray God he be not angry .

Who's there , I say ? How dare you thrust yourselves 
Into my private meditations ?
Who am I , ha ?

A gracious king that pardons all offences 
Malice ne'er meant : our breach of duty this way 
Is business of estate ; in which we come 
To know your royal pleasure .

Ye are too bold .
Go to ; I'll make ye know your times of business :
Is this an hour for temporal affairs , ha ?


Who's there ? my good Lord Cardinal ? O ! my Wolsey ,
The quiet of my wounded conscience ;
Thou art a cure fit for a king .

You're welcome ,
Most learned reverend sir , into our kingdom :
Use us , and it .

My good lord , have great care 

I be not found a talker .

Sir , you cannot .
I would your Grace would give us but an hour 
Of private conference .

We are busy : go .

This priest has no pride in him !

Not to speak of ;
I would not be so sick though for his place :
But this cannot continue .

If it do ,
I'll venture one have-at-him .

I another .


Your Grace has given a precedent of wisdom 
Above all princes , in committing freely 
Your scruple to the voice of Christendom .
Who can be angry now ? what envy reach you ?
The Spaniard , tied by blood and favour to her ,
Must now confess , if they have any goodness ,
The trial just and noble . All the clerks ,
I mean the learned ones , in Christian kingdoms 
Have their free voices : Rome , the nurse of judgment ,
Invited by your noble self , hath sent 
One general tongue unto us , this good man ,
This just and learned priest , Cardinal Campeius ;
Whom once more I present unto your highness .

And once more in my arms I bid him welcome ,
And thank the holy conclave for their loves :
They have sent me such a man I would have wish'd for .

Your Grace must needs deserve all strangers' loves ,
You are so noble . To your highness' hand 
I tender my commission , by whose virtue ,
The court of Rome commanding ,you , my Lord 
Cardinal of York , are join'd with me , their servant ,
In the impartial judging of this business .

Two equal men . The queen shall be acquainted 
Forthwith for what you come . Where's Gardiner ?

I know your majesty has always lov'd her 
So dear in heart , not to deny her that 
A woman of less place might ask by law ,
Scholars , allow'd freely to argue for her .

Ay , and the best , she shall have ; and my favour 
To him that does best : God forbid else . Cardinal ,
Prithee , call Gardiner to me , my new secretary :
I find him a fit fellow .

Give me your hand ; much joy and favour to you ;
You are the king's now .

But to be commanded 
For ever by your Grace , whose hand has rais'd me .

Come hither , Gardiner .


My Lord of York , was not one Doctor Pace 
In this man's place before him ?

Yes , he was .

Was he not held a learned man ?

Yes , surely .

Believe me , there's an ill opinion spread then 
Even of yourself , Lord Cardinal .

How ! of me ?

They will not stick to say , you envied him ,
And fearing he would rise , he was so virtuous ,
Kept him a foreign man still ; which so griev'd him 
That he ran mad and died .

Heaven's peace be with him !
That's Christian care enough : for living murmurers 
There's places of rebuke . He was a fool ,
For he would needs be virtuous : that good fellow ,
If I command him , follows my appointment :
I will have none so near else . Learn this , brother ,
We live not to be grip'd by meaner persons .

Deliver this with modesty to the queen .

The most convenient place that I can think of 
For such receipt of learning , is Black-Friars ;
There ye shall meet about this weighty business .
My Wolsey , see it furnish'd . O my lord !
Would it not grieve an able man to leave 
So sweet a bedfellow ? But , conscience , conscience !
O ! 'tis a tender place , and I must leave her .


Not for that neither : here's the pang that pinches :
His highness having liv'd so long with her , and she 
So good a lady that no tongue could ever 
Pronounce dishonour of her ; by my life ,
She never knew harm-doing ; O ! now , after 
So many courses of the sun enthron'd ,
Still growing in a majesty and pomp , the which 
To leave a thousand-fold more bitter than 
'Tis sweet at first to acquire , after this process 
To give her the avaunt ! it is a pity 
Would move a monster .

Hearts of most hard temper 
Melt and lament for her .

O ! God's will ; much better 
She ne'er had known pomp : though 't be temporal ,
Yet , if that quarrel , Fortune , do divorce 
It from the bearer , 'tis a sufferance panging 
As soul and body's severing .

Alas ! poor lady ,
She's a stranger now again .

So much the more 
Must pity drop upon her . Verily ,
I swear , 'tis better to be lowly born ,
And range with humble livers in content ,
Than to be perk'd up in a glist'ring grief 
And wear a golden sorrow .

Our content 
Is our best having .

By my troth and maidenhead 
I would not be a queen .

Beshrew me , I would ,
And venture maidenhead for't ; and so would you ,
For all this spice of your hypocrisy .
You , that have so fair parts of woman on you ,
Have too a woman's heart ; which ever yet 
Affected eminence , wealth , sovereignty :
Which , to say sooth , are blessings , and which gifts 
Saving your mincing the capacity 
Of your soft cheveril conscience would receive ,
If you might please to stretch it .

Nay , good troth .

Yes , troth , and troth ; you would not be a queen ?

No , not for all the riches under heaven .

'Tis strange : a three-pence bow'd would hire me ,
Old as I am , to queen it . But , I pray you ,
What think you of a duchess ? have you limbs 
To bear that load of title ?

No , in truth .

Then you are weakly made . Pluck off a little :
I would not be a young count in your way ,
For more than blushing comes to : if your back 
Cannot vouchsafe this burden , 'tis too weak 
Ever to get a boy .

How you do talk !
I swear again , I would not be a queen 
For all the world .

In faith , for little England 
You'd venture an emballing : I myself 
Would for Carnarvonshire , although there 'long'd 
No more to the crown but that . Lo ! who comes here ?


Good morrow , ladies . What were't worth to know 
The secret of your conference ?

My good lord ,
Not your demand ; it values not your asking :
Our mistress' sorrows we were pitying .

It was a gentle business , and becoming 
The action of good women : there is hope 
All will be well .

Now , I pray God , amen !

You bear a gentle mind , and heavenly blessings 
Follow such creatures . That you may , fair lady ,
Perceive I speak sincerely , and high note's 
Ta'en of your many virtues , the king's majesty 
Commends his good opinion of you , and 
Does purpose honour to you no less flowing 
Than Marchioness of Pembroke ; to which title 
A thousand pound a year , annual support ,
Out of his grace he adds .

I do not know 
What kind of my obedience I should tender ;
More than my all is nothing , nor my prayers 
Are not words duly hallow'd , nor my wishes 
More worth than empty vanities ; yet prayers and wishes 
Are all I can return . Beseech your lordship ,
Vouchsafe to speak my thanks and my obedience ,
As from a blushing handmaid , to his highness ,
Whose health and royalty I pray for .

Lady ,
I shall not fail to approve the fair conceit 
The king hath of you .

I have perus'd her well ;
Beauty and honour in her are so mingled 
That they have caught the king ; and who knows yet 
But from this lady may proceed a gem 
To lighten all this isle ?

I'll to the king ,
And say , I spoke with you .

My honour'd lord .


Why , this it is ; see , see !
I have been begging sixteen years in court ,
Am yet a courtier beggarly , nor could 
Come pat betwixt too early and too late ;
For any suit of pounds ; and you , O fate !
A very fresh-fish here ,fie , fie , upon 
This compell'd fortune !have your mouth fill'd up 
Before you open it .

This is strange to me .

How tastes it ? is it bitter ? forty pence , no .
There was a lady once ,'tis an old story ,
That would not be a queen , that would she not ,
For all the mud in Egypt : have you heard it ?

Come , you are pleasant .

With your theme I could 
O'ermount the lark . The Marchioness of Pembroke !
A thousand pounds a year , for pure respect !
No other obligation ! By my life 
That promises more thousands : honour's train 
Is longer than his foreskirt . By this time 
I know your back will bear a duchess : say ,
Are you not stronger than you were ?

Good lady ,
Make yourself mirth with your particular fancy ,
And leave me out on't . Would I had no being ,
If this salute my blood a jot : it faints me ,
To think what follows .
The queen is comfortless , and we forgetful 
In our long absence . Pray , do not deliver 
What here you've heard to her .

What do you think me ?


Whilst our commission from Rome is read ,
Let silence be commanded .

What's the need ?
It hath already publicly been read ,
And on all sides the authority allow'd ;
You may then spare that time .

Be't so . Proceed .

Say , Henry King of England , come into the court .

Henry King of England , come into the court .

Here .

Say , Katharine Queen of England , come into the court .

Katharine Queen of England , come into the court .

Sir , I desire you do me right and justice ;
And to bestow your pity on me ; for 
I am a most poor woman , and a stranger ,
Born out of your dominions ; having here 
No judge indifferent , nor no more assurance 
Of equal friendship and proceeding . Alas ! sir ,
In what have I offended you ? what cause 
Hath my behaviour given to your displeasure ,
That thus you should proceed to put me off 
And take your good grace from me ? Heaven witness ,
I have been to you a true and humble wife ,
At all times to your will conformable ;
Ever in fear to kindle your dislike ,
Yea , subject to your countenance , glad or sorry 
As I saw it inclin'd . When was the hour 
I ever contradicted your desire ,
Or made it not mine too ? Or which of your friends 
Have I not strove to love , although I knew 
He were mine enemy ? what friend of mine 
That had to him deriv'd your anger , did I 
Continue in my liking ? nay , gave notice 
He was from thence discharg'd . Sir , call to mind 
That I have been your wife , in this obedience 
Upward of twenty years , and have been blest 
With many children by you : if , in the course 
And process of this time , you can report ,
And prove it too , against mine honour aught ,
My bond to wedlock , or my love and duty ,
Against your sacred person , in God's name 
Turn me away ; and let the foul'st contempt 
Shut door upon me , and so give me up 
To the sharp'st kind of justice . Please you , sir ,
The king , your father , was reputed for 
A prince most prudent , of an excellent 
And unmatch'd wit and judgment : Ferdinand ,
My father , King of Spain , was reckon'd one 
The wisest prince that there had reign'd by many 
A year before : it is not to be question'd 
That they had gather'd a wise council to them 
Of every realm , that did debate this business ,
Who deem'd our marriage lawful . Wherefore I humbly 
Beseech you , sir , to spare me , till I may 
Be by my friends in Spain advis'd , whose counsel 
I will implore : if not , i' the name of God ,
Your pleasure be fulfill'd !

You have here , lady ,
And of your choice ,these reverend fathers ; men 
Of singular integrity and learning ,
Yea , the elect o' the land , who are assembled 
To plead your cause . It shall be therefore bootless 
That longer you desire the court , as well 
For your own quiet , as to rectify 
What is unsettled in the king .

His Grace 
Hath spoken well and justly : therefore , madam ,
It's fit this royal session do proceed ,
And that , without delay , their arguments 
Be now produc'd and heard .

Lord Cardinal ,
To you I speak .

Your pleasure , madam ?

Sir ,
I am about to weep ; but , thinking that 
We are a queen ,or long have dream'd so ,certain 
The daughter of a king , my drops of tears 
I'll turn to sparks of fire .

Be patient yet .

I will , when you are humble ; nay , before ,
Or God will punish me . I do believe ,
Induc'd by potent circumstances , that 
You are mine enemy ; and make my challenge 
You shall not be my judge ; for it is you 
Have blown this coal betwixt my lord and me ,
Which God's dew quench ! Therefore I say again ,
I utterly abhor , yea , from my soul 
Refuse you for my judge , whom , yet once more ,
I hold my most malicious foe , and think not 
At all a friend to truth .

I do profess 
You speak not like yourself ; who ever yet 
Have stood to charity , and display'd the effects 
Of disposition gentle , and of wisdom 
O'ertopping woman's power . Madam , you do me wrong :
I have no spleen against you ; nor injustice 
For you or any : how far I have proceeded ,
Or how far further shall , is warranted 
By a commission from the consistory ,
Yea , the whole consistory of Rome . You charge me 
That I have blown this coal : I do deny it .
The king is present : if it be known to him 
That I gainsay my deed , how may he wound ,
And worthily , my falsehood ; yea , as much 
As you have done my truth . If he know 
That I am free of your report , he knows 
I am not of your wrong . Therefore in him 
It lies to cure me ; and the cure is , to 
Remove these thoughts from you : the which before 
His highness shall speak in , I do beseech 
You , gracious madam , to unthink your speaking ,
And to say so no more .

My lord , my lord ,
I am a simple woman , much too weak 
To oppose your cunning . You're meek and humble-mouth'd ;
You sign your place and calling , in full seeming ,
With meekness and humility ; but your heart 
Is cramm'd with arrogancy , spleen , and pride .
You have , by fortune and his highness' favours ,
Gone slightly o'er low steps , and now are mounted 
Where powers are your retainers , and your words ,
Domestics to you , serve your will as't please 
Yourself pronounce their office . I must tell you ,
You tender more your person's honour than 
Your high profession spiritual ; that again 
I do refuse you for my judge ; and here ,
Before you all , appeal unto the pope ,
To bring my whole cause 'fore his holiness ,
And to be judg'd by him .


The queen is obstinate ,
Stubborn to justice , apt to accuse it , and 
Disdainful to be tried by't : 'tis not well .
She's going away .

Call her again .

Katharine Queen of England , come into the court .

Madam , you are call'd back .

What need you note it ? pray you , keep your way :
When you are call'd , return . Now , the Lord help !
They vex me past my patience . Pray you , pass on :
I will not tarry ; no , nor ever more 
Upon this business my appearance make 
In any of their courts .


Go thy ways , Kate :
That man i' the world who shall report he has 
A better wife , let him in nought be trusted ,
For speaking false in that : thou art , alone ,
If thy rare qualities , sweet gentleness ,
Thy meekness saint-like , wife-like government ,
Obeying in commanding , and thy parts 
Sovereign and pious else , could speak thee out ,
The queen of earthly queens . She's noble born ;
And , like her true nobility , she has 
Carried herself towards me .

Most gracious sir ,
In humblest manner I require your highness ,
That it shall please you to declare , in hearing 
Of all these ears ,for where I am robb'd and bound 
There must I be unloos'd , although not there 
At once , and fully satisfied ,whether ever I 
Did broach this business to your highness , or 
Laid any scruple in your way , which might 
Induce you to the question on't ? or ever 
Have to you , but with thanks to God for such 
A royal lady , spake one the least word that might 
Be to the prejudice of her present state ,
Or touch of her good person ?

My Lord Cardinal ,
I do excuse you ; yea , upon mine honour ,
I free you from't . You are not to be taught 
That you have many enemies , that know not 
Why they are so , but , like to village curs ,
Bark when their fellows do : by some of these 
The queen is put in anger . You're excus'd :
But will you be more justified ? you ever 
Have wish'd the sleeping of this business ; never 
Desir'd it to be stirr'd ; but oft have hinder'd , oft ,
The passages made toward it . On my honour ,
I speak my good Lord Cardinal to this point ,
And thus far clear him . Now , what mov'd me to't ,
I will be bold with time and your attention :
Then mark the inducement . Thus it came ; give heed to't :
My conscience first receiv'd a tenderness ,
Scruple , and prick , on certain speeches utter'd 
By the Bishop of Bayonne , then French ambassador ,
Who had been hither sent on the debating 
A marriage 'twixt the Duke of Orleans and 
Our daughter Mary . I' the progress of this business ,
Ere a determinate resolution , he 
I mean , the bishop did require a respite ;
Wherein he might the king his lord advertise 
Whether our daughter were legitimate ,
Respecting this our marriage with the dowager ,
Sometimes our brother's wife . This respite shook 
The bosom of my conscience , enter'd me ,
Yea , with a splitting power , and made to tremble 
The region of my breast ; which forc'd such way ,
That many maz'd considerings did throng ,
And press'd in with this caution . First , methought 
I stood not in the smile of heaven , who had 
Commanded nature , that my lady's womb ,
If it conceiv'd a male child by me , should 
Do no more offices of life to't than 
The grave does to the dead ; for her male issue 
Or died where they were made , or shortly after 
This world had air'd them . Hence I took a thought 
This was a judgment on me ; that my kingdom ,
Well worthy the best heir o' the world , should not 
Be gladded in't by me . Then follows that 
I weigh'd the danger which my realms stood in 
By this my issue's fail ; and that gave to me 
Many a groaning throe . Thus hulling in 
The wild sea of my conscience , I did steer 
Toward this remedy , whereupon we are 
Now present here together ; that's to say ,
I meant to rectify my conscience , which 
I then did feel full sick , and yet not well ,
By all the rev'rend fathers of the land 
And doctors learn'd . First , I began in private 
With you , my Lord of Lincoln ; you remember 
How under my oppression I did reek ,
When I first mov'd you .

Very well , my liege .

I have spoke long : be pleas'd yourself to say 
How far you satisfied me .

So please your highness ,
The question did at first so stagger me ,
Bearing a state of mighty moment in't ,
And consequence of dread , that I committed 
The daring'st counsel that I had to doubt ;
And did entreat your highness to this course 
Which you are running here .

Then I mov'd you ,
My Lord of Canterbury , and got your leave 
To make this present summons . Unsolicited 
I left no reverend person in this court ;
But by particular consent proceeded 
Under your hands and seals : therefore , go on ;
For no dislike i' the world against the person 
Of the good queen , but the sharp thorny points 
Of my alleged reasons drive this forward .
Prove but our marriage lawful , by my life 
And kingly dignity , we are contented 
To wear our mortal state to come with her ,
Katharine our queen , before the primest creature 
That's paragon'd o' the world .

So please your highness ,
The queen being absent , 'tis a needful fitness 
That we adjourn this court till further day :
Mean while must be an earnest motion 
Made to the queen , to call back her appeal 
She intends unto his holiness .


I may perceive 
These cardinals trifle with me : I abhor 
This dilatory sloth and tricks of Rome .
My learn'd and well-beloved servant Cranmer ,
Prithee , return : with thy approach , I know ,
My comfort comes along . Break up the court :
I say , set on .


Take thy lute , wench : my soul grows sad with troubles ;
Sing and disperse 'em , if thou canst . Leave working .

Orpheus with his lute made trees ,
And the mountain tops that freeze ,
Bow themselves , when he did sing :
To his music plants and flowers 
Ever sprung ; as sun and showers 
There had made a lasting spring .
Every thing that heard him play ,
Even the billows of the sea ,
Hung their heads , and then lay by .
In sweet music is such art ,
Killing care and grief of heart 
Fall asleep , or hearing , die .


How now !

An't please your Grace , the two great cardinals 
Wait in the presence .

Would they speak with me ?

They will'd me say so , madam .

Pray their Graces 
To come near .

What can be their business 
With me , a poor weak woman , fall'n from favour ?
I do not like their coming , now I think on't .
They should be good men , their affairs as righteous ;
But all hoods make not monks .


Peace to your highness !

Your Graces find me here part of a housewife ,
I would be all , against the worst may happen .
What are your pleasures with me , reverend lords ?

May it please you , noble madam , to withdraw 
Into your private chamber , we shall give you 
The full cause of our coming .

Speak it here ;
There's nothing I have done yet , o' my conscience ,
Deserves a corner : would all other women 
Could speak this with as free a soul as I do !
My lords , I care not so much I am happy 
Above a number if my actions 
Were tried by every tongue , every eye saw 'em ,
Envy and base opinion set against 'em ,
I know my life so even . If your business 
Seek me out , and that way I am wife in ,
Out with it boldly : truth loves open dealing .

Tanta est erga te mentis integritas , regina serenissima ,

O , good my lord , no Latin ;
I am not such a truant since my coming 
As not to know the language I have liv'd in :
A strange tongue makes my cause more strange , suspicious ;
Pray , speak in English : here are some will thank you ,
If you speak truth , for their poor mistress' sake :
Believe me , she has had much wrong . Lord Cardinal ,
The willing'st sin I ever yet committed 
May be absolv'd in English .

Noble lady ,
I am sorry my integrity should breed ,
And service to his majesty and you ,
So deep suspicion , where all faith was meant .
We come not by the way of accusation ,
To taint that honour every good tongue blesses ,
Nor to betray you any way to sorrow ,
You have too much , good lady ; but to know 
How you stand minded in the weighty difference 
Between the king and you ; and to deliver ,
Like free and honest men , our just opinions 
And comforts to your cause .

Most honour'd madam ,
My Lord of York , out of his noble nature ,
Zeal and obedience he still bore your Grace ,
Forgetting , like a good man , your late censure 
Both of his truth and him ,which was too far ,
Offers , as I do , in sign of peace ,
His service and his counsel .

To betray me .
My lords , I thank you both for your good wills ;
Ye speak like honest men ,pray God , ye prove so !
But how to make ye suddenly an answer ,
In such a point of weight , so near mine honour ,
More near my life , I fear ,with my weak wit ,
And to such men of gravity and learning ,
In truth , I know not . I was set at work 
Among my maids ; full little , God knows , looking 
Either for such men or such business .
For her sake that I have been ,for I feel 
The last fit of my greatness ,good your Graces 
Let me have time and counsel for my cause :
Alas ! I am a woman , friendless , hopeless .

Madam , you wrong the king's love with these fears :
Your hopes and friends are infinite .

In England 
But little for my profit . Can you think , lords ,
That any Englishman dare give me counsel ?
Or be a known friend , 'gainst his highness' pleasure ,
Though he be grown so desperate to be honest ,
And live a subject ? Nay , forsooth , my friends ,
They that must weigh out my afflictions ,
They that my trust must grow to , live not here :
They are , as all my other comforts , far hence 
In mine own country , lords .

I would your Grace 
Would leave your griefs , and take my counsel .

How , sir ?

Put your main cause into the king's protection ;
He's loving and most gracious : 'twill be much 
Both for your honour better and your cause ;
For if the trial of the law o'ertake ye ,
You'll part away disgrac'd .

He tells you rightly .

Ye tell me what ye wish for both ; my ruin .
Is this your Christian counsel ? out upon ye !
Heaven is above all yet ; there sits a judge 
That no king can corrupt .

Your rage mistakes us .

The more shame for ye ! holy men I thought ye ,
Upon my soul , two reverend cardinal virtues ;
But cardinal sins and hollow hearts I fear ye .
Mend 'em , for shame , my lords . Is this your comfort ?
The cordial that ye bring a wretched lady ,
A woman lost among ye , laugh'd at , scorn'd ?
I will not wish ye half my miseries ,
I have more charity ; but say , I warn'd ye :
Take heed , for heaven's sake , take heed , lest at once 
The burden of my sorrows fall upon ye .

Madam , this is a mere distraction ;
You turn the good we offer into envy .

Ye turn me into nothing : woe upon ye ,
And all such false professors ! Would ye have me ,
If ye have any justice , any pity ;
If ye be anything but churchmen's habits ,
Put my sick cause into his hands that hates me ?
Alas ! he has banish'd me his bed already ,
His love , too long ago ! I am old , my lords ,
And all the fellowship I hold now with him 
Is only my obedience . What can happen 
To me above this wretchedness ? all your studies 
Make me a curse like this .

Your fears are worse .

Have I liv'd thus long let me speak myself ,
Since virtue finds no friends a wife , a true one ?
A woman , I dare say without vain-glory ,
Never yet branded with suspicion ?
Have I with all my full affections 
Still met the king ? lov'd him next heaven ? obey'd him ?
Been , out of fondness , superstitious to him ?
Almost forgot my prayers to content him ?
And am I thus rewarded ? 'tis not well , lords .
Bring me a constant woman to her husband ,
One that ne'er dream'd a joy beyond his pleasure ,
And to that woman , when she has done most ,
Yet will I add an honour , a great patience .

Madam , you wander from the good we aim at .

My lord , I dare not make myself so guilty ,
To give up willingly that noble title 
Your master wed me to : nothing but death 
Shall e'er divorce my dignities .

Pray hear me .

Would I had never trod this English earth ,
Or felt the flatteries that grow upon it !
Ye have angels' faces , but heaven knows your hearts .
What will become of me now , wretched lady ?
I am the most unhappy woman living .


Alas ! poor wenches , where are now your fortunes ?
Shipwrack'd upon a kingdom , where no pity ,
No friends , no hope ; no kindred weep for me ;
Almost no grave allow'd me . Like the lily ,
That once was mistress of the field and flourish'd ,
I'll hang my head and perish .

If your Grace 
Could but be brought to know our ends are honest ,
You'd feel more comfort . Why should we , good lady ,
Upon what cause , wrong you ? alas ! our places ,
The way of our profession is against it :
We are to cure such sorrows , not to sow them .
For goodness' sake , consider what you do ;
How you may hurt yourself , ay , utterly 
Grow from the king's acquaintance , by this carriage .
The hearts of princes kiss obedience ,
So much they love it ; but to stubborn spirits 
They swell , and grow as terrible as storms .
I know you have a gentle , noble temper ,
A soul as even as a calm : pray think us 
Those we profess , peace-makers , friends , and servants .

Madam , you'll find it so . You wrong your virtues 
With these weak women's fears : a noble spirit ,
As yours was put into you , ever casts 
Such doubts , as false coin , from it . The king loves you ;
Beware you lose it not : for us , if you please 
To trust us in your business , we are ready 
To use our utmost studies in your service .

Do what ye will , my lords : and , pray , forgive me 
If I have us'd myself unmannerly .
You know I am a woman , lacking wit 
To make a seemly answer to such persons .
Pray do my service to his majesty :
He has my heart yet ; and shall have my prayers 
While I shall have my life . Come , reverend fathers ,
Bestow your counsels on me : she now begs 
That little thought , when she set footing here ,
She should have bought her dignities so dear .


If you will now unite in your complaints ,
And force them with a constancy , the cardinal 
Cannot stand under them : if you omit 
The offer of this time , I cannot promise 
But that you shall sustain moe new disgraces 
With these you bear already .

I am joyful 
To meet the least occasion that may give me 
Remembrance of my father-in-law , the duke ,
To be reveng'd on him .

Which of the peers 
Have uncontemn'd gone by him , or at least 
Strangely neglected ? when did he regard 
The stamp of nobleness in any person ,
Out of himself ?

My lords , you speak your pleasures :
What he deserves of you and me , I know ;
What we can do to him ,though now the time 
Gives way to us ,I much fear . If you cannot 
Bar his access to the king , never attempt 
Any thing on him , for he hath a witchcraft 
Over the king in's tongue .

O ! fear him not ;
His spell in that is out : the king hath found 
Matter against him that for ever mars 
The honey of his language . No , he's settled ,
Not to come off , in his displeasure .

Sir ,
I should be glad to hear such news as this 
Once every hour .

Believe it , this is true :
In the divorce his contrary proceedings 
Are all unfolded ; wherein he appears 
As I would wish mine enemy .

How came 
His practices to light ?

Most strangely .

O ! how ? how ?

The cardinal's letter to the pope miscarried ,
And came to the eye o' the king ; wherein was read ,
That the cardinal did entreat his holiness 
To stay the judgment o' the divorce ; for if 
It did take place , 'I do ,' quoth he , 'perceive 
My king is tangled in affection to 
A creature of the queen's , Lady Anne Bullen .' 

Has the king this ?

Believe it .

Will this work ?

The king in this perceives him , how he coasts 
And hedges his own way . But in this point 
All his tricks founder , and he brings his physic 
After his patient's death : the king already 
Hath married the fair lady .

Would he had !

May you be happy in your wish , my lord !
For I profess , you have it .

Now all my joy 
Trace the conjunction !

My amen to't !

All men's .

There's order given for her coronation :
Marry , this is yet but young , and may be left 
To some ears unrecounted . But , my lords ,
She is a gallant creature , and complete 
In mind and feature : I persuade me , from her 
Will fall some blessing to this land , which shall 
In it be memoriz'd .

But will the king 
Digest this letter of the cardinal's ?
The Lord forbid !

Marry , amen !

No , no ;
There be moe wasps that buzz about his nose 
Will make this sting the sooner . Cardinal Campeius 
Is stol'n away to Rome ; hath ta'en no leave ;
Has left the cause o' the king unhandled ; and 
Is posted , as the agent of our cardinal ,
To second all his plot . I do assure you 
The king cried Ha ! at this .

Now , God incense him ,
And let him cry Ha ! louder .

But , my lord ,
When returns Cranmer ?

He is return'd in his opinions , which 
Have satisfied the king for his divorce ,
Together with all famous colleges 
Almost in Christendom . Shortly , I believe ,
His second marriage shall be publish'd , and 
Her coronation . Katharine no more 
Shall be call'd queen , but princess dowager ,
And widow to Prince Arthur .

This same Cranmer's 
A worthy fellow , and hath ta'en much pain 
In the king's business .

He has ; and we shall see him 
For it an archbishop .

So I hear .

'Tis so .
The cardinal !


Observe , observe ; he's moody .

The packet , Cromwell ,
Gave't you the king ?

To his own hand , in his bedchamber .

Look'd he o' the inside of the paper ?

Presently 
He did unseal them ; and the first he view'd ,
He did it with a serious mind ; a heed 
Was in his countenance . You he bade 
Attend him here this morning .

Is he ready 
To come abroad ?

I think , by this he is .

Leave me awhile .

It shall be to the Duchess of Alen on ,
The French King's sister ; he shall marry her .
Anne Bullen ! No ; I'll no Anne Bullens for him :
There's more in't than fair visage . Bullen !
No , we'll no Bullens . Speedily I wish 
To hear from Rome . The Marchioness of Pembroke !

He's discontented .

May be he hears the king 
Does whet his anger to him .

Sharp enough ,
Lord , for thy justice !

The late queen's gentlewoman , a knight's daughter ,
To be her mistress' mistress ! the queen's queen !
This candle burns not clear : 'tis I must snuff it ;
Then , out it goes . What though I know her virtuous 
And well deserving ? yet I know her for 
A spleeny Lutheran ; and not wholesome to 
Our cause , that she should lie i' the bosom of 
Our hard-rul'd king . Again , there is sprung up 
A heretic , an arch one , Cranmer ; one 
Hath crawl'd into the favour of the king ,
And is his oracle .

He is vex'd at something .

I would 'twere something that would fret the string ,
The master-cord on's heart !


The king , the king !

What piles of wealth hath he accumulated 
To his own portion ! and what expense by the hour 
Seems to flow from him ! How , i' the name of thrift ,
Does he rake this together ? Now , my lords ,
Saw you the cardinal ?

My lord , we have 
Stood here observing him ; some strange commotion 
Is in his brain : he bites his lip , and starts ;
Stops on a sudden , looks upon the ground ,
Then lays his finger on his temple ; straight 
Springs out into fast gait ; then stops again ,
Strikes his breast hard ; and anon he casts 
His eye against the moon : in most strange postures 
We have seen him set himself .

It may well be :
There is a mutiny in 's mind . This morning 
Papers of state he sent me to peruse ,
As I requir'd ; and wot you what I found 
There , on my conscience , put unwittingly ?
Forsooth , an inventory , thus importing ;
The several parcels of his plate , his treasure ,
Rich stuffs and ornaments of household , which 
I find at such a proud rate that it out-speaks 
Possession of a subject .

It's heaven's will :
Some spirit put this paper in the packet 
To bless your eye withal .

If we did think 
His contemplation were above the earth ,
And fix'd on spiritual object , he should still 
Dwell in his musings : but I am afraid 
His thinkings are below the moon , not worth 
His serious considering .


Heaven forgive me !
Ever God bless your highness !

Good my lord ,
You are full of heavenly stuff , and bear the inventory 
Of your best graces in your mind , the which 
You were now running o'er : you have scarce time 
To steal from spiritual leisure a brief span 
To keep your earthly audit : sure , in that 
I deem you an ill husband , and am glad 
To have you therein my companion .

Sir ,
For holy offices I have a time ; a time 
To think upon the part of business which 
I bear i' the state ; and nature does require 
Her times of preservation , which perforce 
I , her frail son , amongst my brethren mortal ,
Must give my tendance to .

You have said well .

And ever may your highness yoke together ,
As I will lend you cause , my doing well 
With my well saying !

'Tis well said again ;
And 'tis a kind of good deed to say well :
And yet words are no deeds . My father lov'd you :
He said he did ; and with his deed did crown 
His word upon you . Since I had my office ,
I have kept you next my heart ; have not alone 
Employ'd you where high profits might come home ,
But par'd my present havings , to bestow 
My bounties upon you .

What should this mean ?

The Lord increase this business !

Have I not made you 
The prime man of the state ? I pray you , tell me 
If what I now pronounce you have found true ;
And if you may confess it , say withal ,
If you are bound to us or no . What say you ?

My sovereign , I confess your royal graces ,
Shower'd on me daily , have been more than could 
My studied purposes requite ; which went 
Beyond all man's endeavours : my endeavours 
Have ever come too short of my desires ,
Yet fil'd with my abilities . Mine own ends 
Have been mine so , that evermore they pointed 
To the good of your most sacred person and 
The profit of the state . For your great graces 
Heap'd upon me , poor undeserver , I 
Can nothing render but allegiant thanks ,
My prayers to heaven for you , my loyalty ,
Which ever has and ever shall be growing ,
Till death , that winter , kill it .

Fairly answer'd ;
A loyal and obedient subject is 
Therein illustrated ; the honour of it 
Does pay the act of it , as , i' the contrary ,
The foulness is the punishment . I presume 
That as my hand has open'd bounty to you ,
My heart dropp'd love , my power rain'd honour , more 
On you than any ; so your hand and heart ,
Your brain , and every function of your power ,
Should , notwithstanding that your bond of duty ,
As 'twere in love's particular , be more 
To me , your friend , than any .

I do profess ,
That for your highness' good I ever labour'd 
More than mine own ; that am , have , and will be .
Though all the world should crack their duty to you ,
And throw it from their soul ; though perils did 
Abound as thick as thought could make 'em , and 
Appear in forms more horrid , yet my duty ,
As doth a rock against the chiding flood ,
Should the approach of this wild river break ,
And stand unshaken yours .

'Tis nobly spoken .
Take notice , lords , he has a loyal breast ,
For you have seen him open't . Read o'er this ;

And after , this : and then to breakfast with 
What appetite you have .


What should this mean ?
What sudden anger's this ? how have I reap'd it ?
He parted frowning from me , as if ruin 
Leap'd from his eyes : so looks the chafed lion 
Upon the daring huntsman that has gall'd him ;
Then makes him nothing . I must read this paper ;
I fear , the story of his anger . 'Tis so ;
This paper has undone me ! 'Tis the account 
Of all that world of wealth I have drawn together 
For mine own ends ; indeed , to gain the popedom ,
And fee my friends in Rome . O negligence !
Fit for a fool to fall by : what cross devil 
Made me put this main secret in the packet 
I sent the king ? Is there no way to cure this ?
No new device to beat this from his brains ?
I know 'twill stir him strongly ; yet I know 
A way , if it take right , in spite of fortune 
Will bring me off again . What's this ?'To the Pope !' 
The letter , as I live , with all the business 
I writ to's holiness . Nay then , farewell !
I have touch'd the highest point of all my greatness ;
And from that full meridian of my glory ,
I haste now to my setting : I shall fall 
Like a bright exhalation in the evening ,
And no man see me more .


Hear the king's pleasure , cardinal : who commands you 
To render up the great seal presently 
Into our hands ; and to confine yourself 
To Asher-house , my Lord of Winchester's ,
Till you hear further from his highness .

Stay ,
Where's your commission , lord ? words cannot carry 
Authority so weighty .

Who dare cross 'em ,
Bearing the king's will from his mouth expressly ?

Till I find more than will or words to do it ,
I mean your malice , know , officious lords ,
I dare and must deny it . Now I feel 
Of what coarse metal ye are moulded , envy :
How eagerly ye follow my disgraces ,
As if it fed ye ! and how sleek and wanton 
Ye appear in every thing may bring my ruin 
Follow your envious courses , men of malice ;
You have Christian warrant for 'em , and , no doubt ,
In time will find their fit rewards . That seal 
You ask with such a violence , the king 
Mine and your master with his own hand gave me ;
Bade me enjoy it with the place and honours 
During my life ; and to confirm his goodness ,
Tied it by letters-patents : now who'll take it ?

The king , that gave it .

It must be himself then .

Thou art a proud traitor , priest .

Proud lord , thou liest :
Within these forty hours Surrey durst better 
Have burnt that tongue than said so .

Thy ambition ,
Thou scarlet sin , robb'd this bewailing land 
Of noble Buckingham , my father-in-law :
The heads of all thy brother cardinals 
With thee and all thy best parts bound together 
Weigh'd not a hair of his . Plague of your policy !
You sent me deputy for Ireland ,
Far from his succour , from the king , from all 
That might have mercy on the fault thou gav'st him ;
Whilst your great goodness , out of holy pity ,
Absolv'd him with an axe .

This and all else 
This talking lord can lay upon my credit ,
I answer is most false . The duke by law 
Found his deserts : how innocent I was 
From any private malice in his end ,
His noble jury and foul cause can witness .
If I lov'd many words , lord , I should tell you ,
You have as little honesty as honour ,
That in the way of loyalty and truth 
Toward the king , my ever royal master ,
Dare mate a sounder man than Surrey can be ,
And all that love his follies .

By my soul ,
Your long coat , priest , protects you ; thou shouldst feel 
My sword i' the life-blood of thee else . My lords ,
Can ye endure to hear this arrogance ?
And from this fellow ? If we live thus tamely ,
To be thus jaded by a piece of scarlet ,
Farewell nobility ; let his Grace go forward ,
And dare us with his cap like larks .

All goodness 
Is poison to thy stomach .

Yes , that goodness 
Of gleaning all the land's wealth into one ,
Into your own hands , cardinal , by extortion ;
The goodness of your intercepted packets ,
You writ to the pope against the king ; your goodness ,
Since you provoke me , shall be most notorious .
My Lord of Norfolk , as you are truly noble ,
As you respect the common good , the state 
Of our despis'd nobility , our issues ,
Who , if he live , will scarce be gentlemen ,
Produce the grand sum of his sins , the articles 
Collected from his life ; I'll startle you 
Worse than the sacring bell , when the brown wench 
Lay kissing in your arms , Lord Cardinal .

How much , methinks , I could despise this man ,
But that I am bound in charity against it !

Those articles , my lord , are in the king's hand ;
But , thus much , they are foul ones .

So much fairer 
And spotless shall mine innocence arise 
When the king knows my truth .

This cannot save you :
I thank my memory , I yet remember 
Some of these articles ; and out they shall .
Now , if you can blush , and cry 'guilty ,' cardinal ,
You'll show a little honesty .

Speak on , sir ;
I dare your worst objections ; if I blush ,
It is to see a nobleman want manners .

I had rather want those than my head . Have at you !
First , that , without the king's assent or know ledge ,
You wrought to be a legate ; by which power 
You maim'd the jurisdiction of all bishops .

Then , that in all you writ to Rome , or else 
To foreign princes , Ego et Rex meus 
Was still inscrib'd ; in which you brought the king 
To be your servant .

Then , that without the knowledge 
Either of king or council , when you went 
Ambassador to the emperor , you made bold 
To carry into Flanders the great seal .

Item , you sent a large commission 
To Gregory de Cassado , to conclude ,
Without the king's will or the state's allowance ,
A league between his highness and Ferrara .

That , out of mere ambition , you have caus'd 
Your holy hat to be stamp'd on the king's coin .

Then , that you have sent innumerable substance ,
By what means got I leave to your own conscience ,
To furnish Rome , and to prepare the ways 
You have for dignities ; to the mere undoing 
Of all the kingdom . Many more there are ;
Which , since they are of you , and odious ,
I will not taint my mouth with .

O my lord !
Press not a falling man too far ; 'tis virtue :
His faults lie open to the laws ; let them ,
Not you , correct him . My heart weeps to see him 
So little of his great self .

I forgive him .

Lord Cardinal , the king's further pleasure is ,
Because all those things you have done of late ,
By your power legatine , within this kingdom ,
Fall into the compass of a pr munire ,
That therefore such a writ be su'd against you ;
To forfeit all your goods , lands , tenements ,
Chattels , and whatsoever , and to be 
Out of the king's protection . This is my charge .

And so we'll leave you to your meditations 
How to live better . For your stubborn answer 
About the giving back the great seal to us ,
The king shall know it , and , no doubt , shall thank you .
So fare you well , my little good Lord Cardinal .


So farewell to the little good you bear me .
Farewell ! a long farewell , to all my greatness !
This is the state of man : to-day be puts forth 
The tender leaves of hopes ; to-morrow blossoms ,
And bears his blushing honours thick upon him ;
The third day comes a frost , a killing frost ;
And , when he thinks , good easy man , full surely 
His greatness is a-ripening , nips his root ,
And then he falls , as I do . I have ventur'd ,
Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders ,
This many summers in a sea of glory ,
But far beyond my depth : my high-blown pride 
At length broke under me , and now has left me ,
Weary and old with service , to the mercy 
Of a rude stream , that must for ever hide me .
Vain pomp and glory of this world , I hate yo :
I feel my heart new open'd . O ! how wretched 
Is that poor man that hangs on princes' favours !
There is , betwixt that smile we would aspire to ,
That sweet aspect of princes , and their ruin ,
More pangs and fears than wars or women have ;
And when he falls , he falls like Lucifer ,
Never to hope again .

Why , how now , Cromwell !

I have no power to speak , sir .

What ! amaz'd 
At my misfortunes ? can thy spirit wonder 
A great man should decline ? Nay , an you weep ,
I am fall'n indeed .

How does your Grace ?

Why , well ;
Never so truly happy , my good Cromwell .
I know myself now ; and I feel within me 
A peace above all earthly dignities ,
A still and quiet conscience . The king has cur'd me ,
I humbly thank his Grace ; and from these shoulders ,
These ruin'd pillars , out of pity taken 
A load would sink a navy , too much honour :
O ! 'tis a burden , Cromwell , 'tis a burden 
Too heavy for a man that hopes for heaven .

I am glad your Grace has made that right use of it .

I hope I have : I am able now , methinks ,
Out of a fortitude of soul I feel ,
To endure more miseries and greater far 
Than my weak-hearted enemies dare offer .
What news abroad ?

The heaviest and the worst ,
Is your displeasure with the king .

God bless him !

The next is , that Sir Thomas More is chosen 
Lord Chancellor in your place .

That's somewhat sudden :
But he's a learned man . May he continue 
Long in his highness' favour , and do justice 
For truth's sake and his conscience ; that his bones ,
When he has run his course and sleeps in blessings ,
May have a tomb of orphans' tears wept on 'em !
What more ?

That Cranmer is return'd with welcome ,
Install'd Lord Archbishop of Canterbury .

That's news indeed .

Last , that the Lady Anne ,
Whom the king hath in secrecy long married ,
This day was view'd in open , as his queen ,
Going to chapel ; and the voice is now 
Only about her coronation .

There was the weight that pull'd me down . O Cromwell !
The king has gone beyond me : all my glories 
In that one woman I have lost for ever .
No sun shall ever usher forth mine honours ,
Or gild again the noble troops that waited 
Upon my smiles . Go , get thee from me , Cromwell ;
I am a poor fall'n man , unworthy now 
To be thy lord and master : seek the king ;
That sun , I pray , may never set !I have told him 
What , and how true thou art : he will advance thee ;
Some little memory of me will stir him 
I know his noble nature not to let 
Thy hopeful service perish too . Good Cromwell ,
Neglect him not ; make use now , and provide 
For thine own future safety .

O my lord !
Must I then , leave you ? must I needs forego 
So good , so noble , and so true a master ?
Bear witness all that have not hearts of iron ,
With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his lord .
The king shall have my service ; but my prayers 
For ever and for ever , shall be yours .

Cromwell , I did not think to shed a tear 
In all my miseries ; but thou hast forc'd me ,
Out of thy honest truth , to play the woman .
Let's dry our eyes : and thus far hear me , Cromwell ;
And , when I am forgotten , as I shall be ,
And sleep in dull cold marble , where no mention 
Of me more must be heard of , say , I taught thee ,
Say , Wolsey , that once trod the ways of glory ,
And sounded all the depths and shoals of honour ,
Found thee a way , out of his wrack , to rise in ;
A sure and safe one , though thy master miss'd it .
Mark but my fall , and that that ruin'd me .
Cromwell , I charge thee , fling away ambition :
By that sin fell the angels ; how can man then ,
The image of his Maker , hope to win by't ?
Love thyself last : cherish those hearts that hate thee ;
Corruption wins not more than honesty .
Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace ,
To silence envious tongues : be just , and fear not .
Let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's ,
Thy God's , and truth's ; then if thou fall'st , O Cromwell !
Thou fall'st a blessed martyr . Serve the king ;
And ,prithee , lead me in :
There take an inventory of all I have ,
To the last penny ; 'tis the king's : my robe ,
And my integrity to heaven is all 
I dare now call mine own . O Cromwell , Cromwell !
Had I but serv'd my God with half the zeal 
I serv'd my king , he would not in mine age 
Have left me naked to mine enemies .

Good sir , have patience .

So I have . Farewell 
The hopes of court ! my hopes in heaven do dwell .


You're well met once again .

So are you .

You come to take your stand here , and behold 
The Lady Anne pass from her coronation ?

'Tis all my business . At our last encounter 
The Duke of Buckingham came from his trial .

'Tis very true : but that time offer'd sorrow ;
This , general joy .

'Tis well : the citizens ,
I am sure , have shown at full their royal minds ,
As , let 'em have their rights , they are ever forward ,
In celebration of this day with shows ,
Pageants , and sights of honour .

Never greater ;
Nor , I'll assure you , better taken , sir .

May I be bold to ask what that contains ,
That paper in your hand ?

Yes ; 'tis the list 
Of those that claim their offices this day 
By custom of the coronation .
The Duke of Suffolk is the first , and claims 
To be high-steward ; next , the Duke of Norfolk ,
He to be earl marshal : you may read the rest .

I thank you , sir : had I not known those customs ,
I should have been beholding to your paper .
But , I beseech you , what's become of Katharine ,
The princess dowager ? how goes her business ?

That I can tell you too . The Archbishop 
Of Canterbury , accompanied with other 
Learned and reverend fathers of his order ,
Held a late court at Dunstable , six miles off 
From Ampthill , where the princess lay ; to which 
She was often cited by them , but appear'd not :
And , to be short , for not appearance and 
The king's late scruple , by the main assent 
Of all these learned men she was divorc'd ,
And the late marriage made of none effect :
Since which she was remov'd to Kimbolton ,
Where she remains now sick .

Alas ! good lady !

The trumpets sound : stand close , the queen is coming .

A lively flourish of trumpets .


1.  Two Judges .
2  Lord Chancellor , with the purse and mace before him .
3.  Choristers , singing .


4.  Mayor of London , bearing the mace . Then Garter , in his coat of arms , and on his head a gilt copper crown .
5.

6.

7.  A canopy borne by four of the Cinque-ports ; under it , the 

8.  The old 
9.  Certain Ladies or Countesses , with plain circlets of gold without flowers .
They pass over the stage in order and state .


A royal train , believe me . These I know ;
Who's that that bears the sceptre ?

Marquess Dorset :
And that the Earl of Surrey with the rod .

A bold brave gentleman . That should be 
The Duke of Suffolk ?

'Tis the same ; high-steward .

And that my Lord of Norfolk ?

Yes .

Heaven bless thee !
Thou hast the sweetest face I ever look'd on .
Sir , as I have a soul , she is an angel ;
Our king has all the Indies in his arms ,
And more and richer , when he strains that lady :
I cannot blame his conscience .

They that bear 
The cloth of honour over her , are four barons 
Of the Cinque-ports .

Those men are happy ; and so are all are near her .
I take it , she that carries up the train 
Is that old noble lady , Duchess of Norfolk .

It is ; and all the rest are countesses .

Their coronets say so . These are stars indeed ;
And sometimes falling ones .

No more of that .


God save you , sir ! Where have you been broiling ?

Among the crowd i' the Abbey ; where a finger 
Could not be wedg'd in more : I am stifled 
With the mere rankness of their joy .

You saw 
The ceremony ?

That I did .

How was it ?

Well worth the seeing .

Good sir , speak it to us .

As well as I am able . The rich stream 
Of lords and ladies , having brought the queen 
To a prepar'd place in the choir , fell off 
A distance from her ; while her Grace sat down 
To rest awhile , some half an hour or so ,
In a rich chair of state , opposing freely 
The beauty of her person to the people .
Believe me , sir , she is the goodliest woman 
That ever lay by man : which when the people 
Had the full view of , such a noise arose 
As the shrouds make at sea in a stiff tempest ,
As loud , and to as many tunes : hats , cloaks ,
Doublets , I think ,flew up ; and had their faces 
Been loose , this day they had been lost . Such joy 
I never saw before . Great-bellied women ,
That had not half a week to go , like rams 
In the old time of war , would shake the press ,
And make 'em reel before them . No man living 
Could say , 'This is my wife ,' there ; all were woven 
So strangely in one piece .

But , what follow'd ?

At length her Grace rose , and with modest paces 
Came to the altar ; where she kneel'd , and , saint-like ,
Cast her fair eyes to heaven and pray'd devoutly .
Then rose again and bow'd her to the people :
When by the Archbishop of Canterbury 
She had all the royal makings of a queen ;
As holy oil , Edward Confessor's crown ,
The rod , and bird of peace , and all such emblems 
Laid nobly on her : which perform'd , the choir ,
With all the choicest music of the kingdom ,
Together sung Te Deum . So she parted ,
And with the same full state pac'd back again 
To York-place , where the feast is held .

Sir ,
You must no more call it York-place , that's past ;
For , since the cardinal fell , that title's lost :
'Tis now the king's , and call'd Whitehall .

I know it ;
But 'tis so lately alter'd that the old name 
Is fresh about me .

What two reverend bishops 
Were those that went on each side of the queen ?

Stokesly and Gardiner ; the one of Winchester ,
Newly preferr'd from the king's secretary ,
The other , London .

He of Winchester 
Is held no great good lover of the archbishop's ,
The virtuous Cranmer .

All the land knows that :
However , yet there's no great breach ; when it comes ,
Cranmer will find a friend will not shrink from him .

Who may that be , I pray you ?

Thomas Cromwell :
A man in much esteem with the king , and truly 
A worthy friend . The king 
Has made him master o' the jewel house ,
And one , already , of the privy-council .

He will deserve more .

Yes , without all doubt .
Come , gentlemen , ye shall go my way , which 
Is to the court , and there ye shall be my guests :
Something I can command . As I walk thither ,
I'll tell ye more .

You may command us , sir .


How does your Grace ?

O Griffith ! sick to death !
My legs , like loaden branches , bow to the earth ,
Willing to leave their burden . Reach a chair :
So ; now , methinks , I feel a little ease .
Didst thou not tell me , Griffith , as thou ledd'st me ,
That the great child of honour , Cardinal Wolsey ,
Was dead ?

Yes , madam ; but I think your Grace ,
Out of the pain you suffer'd , gave no ear to't .

Prithee , good Griffith , tell me how he died :
If well , he stepp'd before me , happily ,
For my example .

Well , the voice goes , madam :
For after the stout Earl Northumberland 
Arrested him at York , and brought him forward ,
As a man sorely tainted , to his answer ,
He fell sick suddenly , and grew so ill 
He could not sit his mule .

Alas ! poor man .

At last , with easy roads , he came to Leicester ;
Lodg'd in the abbey , where the reverend abbot ,
With all his covent , honourably receiv'd him :
To whom he gave these words : 'O ! father abbot ,
An old man , broken with the storms of state ,
Is come to lay his weary bones among ye ;
Give him a little earth for charity .' 
So went to bed , where eagerly his sickness 
Pursu'd him still ; and three nights after this ,
About the hour of eight ,which he himself 
Foretold should be his last ,full of repentance ,
Continual meditations , tears , and sorrows ,
He gave his honours to the world again ,
His blessed part to heaven , and slept in peace .

So may he rest ; his faults lie gently on him !
Yet thus far , Griffith , give me leave to speak him ,
And yet with charity . He was a man 
Of an unbounded stomach , ever ranking 
Himself with princes ; one , that by suggestion 
Tied all the kingdom ; simony was fair-play ;
His own opinion was his law ; i' the presence 
He would say untruths , and be ever double 
Both in his words and meaning . He was never ,
But where he meant to ruin , pitiful ;
His promises were , as he then was , mighty ;
But his performance , as he is now , nothing :
Of his own body he was ill , and gave 
The clergy ill example .

Noble madam ,
Men's evil manners live in brass ; their virtues 
We write in water . May it please your highness 
To hear me speak his good now ?

Yes , good Griffith ,
I were malicious else .

This cardinal ,
Though from a humble stock , undoubtedly 
Was fashion'd to much honour from his cradle .
He was a scholar , and a ripe and good one ;
Exceeding wise , fair-spoken , and persuading ;
Lofty and sour to them that lov'd him not ;
But , to those men that sought him sweet as summer .
And though he were unsatisfied in getting ,
Which was a sin ,yet in bestowing , madam ,
He was most princely . Ever witness for him 
Those twins of learning that he rais'd in you ,
Ipswich , and Oxford ! one of which fell with him ,
Unwilling to outlive the good that did it ;
The other , though unfinish'd , yet so famous ,
So excellent in art , and still so rising ,
That Christendom shall ever speak his virtue .
His overthrow heap'd happiness upon him ;
For then , and not till then , he felt himself ,
And found the blessedness of being little :
And , to add greater honours to his age 
Than man could give him , he died fearing God .

After my death I wish no other herald ,
No other speaker of my living actions ,
To keep mine honour from corruption ,
But such an honest chronicler as Griffith .
Whom I most hated living , thou hast made me ,
With thy religious truth and modesty ,
Now in his ashes honour . Peace be with him !
Patience , be near me still ; and set me lower :
I have not long to trouble thee . Good Griffith ,
Cause the musicians play me that sad note 
I nam'd my knell , whilst I sit meditating 
On that celestial harmony I go to .


She is asleep : good wench , let's sit down quiet ,
For fear we wake her : softly , gentle Patience .


Spirits of peace , where are ye ? Are ye all gone ,
And leave me here in wretchedness behind ye ?

Madam , we are here .

It is not you I call for :
Saw ye none enter since I slept ?

None , madam .

No ? Saw you not , even now , a blessed troop 
Invite me to a banquet ; whose bright faces 
Cast thousand beams upon me , like the sun ?
They promis'd me eternal happiness ,
And brought me garlands , Griffith , which I feel 
I am not worthy yet to wear : I shall assuredly .

I am most joyful , madam , such good dreams 
Possess your fancy .

Bid the music leave ,
They are harsh and heavy to me .


Do you note 
How much her Grace is alter'd on the sudden ?
How long her face is drawn ? How pale she looks ,
And of an earthy cold ? Mark her eyes !

She is going , wench . Pray , pray .

Heaven comfort her !


An't like your Grace ,

You are a saucy fellow :
Deserve we no more reverence ?

You are to blame ,
Knowing she will not lose her wonted greatness ,
To use so rude behaviour ; go to , kneel .

I humbly do entreat your highness pardon ;
My haste made me unmannerly . There is staying 
A gentleman , sent from the king , to see you .

Admit him entrance , Griffith : but this fellow 
Let me ne'er see again .

If my sight fail not ,
You should be lord ambassador from the emperor ,

My royal nephew , and your name Capucius .

Madam , the same ; your servant .

O my lord !
The times and titles now are alter'd strangely 
With me since first you knew me . But , I pray you ,
What is your pleasure with me ?

Noble lady ,
First , mine own service to your Grace ; the next ,
The king's request that I would visit you ;
Who grieves much for your weakness , and by me 
Sends you his princely commendations ,
And heartily entreats you take good comfort .

O ! my good lord , that comfort comes too late ;
'Tis like a pardon after execution :
That gentle physic , given in time , had cur'd me ;
But now I am past all comforts here but prayers .
How does his highness ?

Madam , in good health .

So may he ever do ! and ever flourish ,
When I shall dwell with worms , and my poor name 
Banish'd the kingdom . Patience , is that letter 
I caus'd you write , yet sent away ?

No , madam .


Sir , I most humbly pray you to deliver 
This to my lord the king .

Most willing , madam .

In which I have commended to his goodness 
The model of our chaste loves , his young daughter :
The dews of heaven fall thick in blessings on her !
Beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding ,
She is young , and of a noble modest nature ,
I hope she will deserve well ,and a little 
To love her for her mother's sake , that lov'd him ,
Heaven knows how dearly . My next poor petition 
Is , that his noble Grace would have some pity 
Upon my wretched women , that so long 
Have follow'd both my fortunes faithfully :
Of which there is not one , I dare avow ,
And now I should not lie ,but will deserve ,
For virtue , and true beauty of the soul ,
For honesty and decent carriage ,
A right good husband , let him be a noble ;
And , sure , those men are happy that shall have 'em .
The last is , for my men : they are the poorest ,
But poverty could never draw 'em from me ;
That they may have their wages duly paid 'em ,
And something over to remember me by :
If heaven had pleas'd to have given me longer life 
And able means , we had not parted thus .
These are the whole contents : and , good my lord ,
By that you love the dearest in this world ,
As you wish Christian peace to souls departed ,
Stand these poor people's friend , and urge the king 
To do me this last right .

By heaven , I will ,
Or let me lose the fashion of a man !

I thank you , honest lord . Remember me 
In all humility unto his highness :
Say his long trouble now is passing 
Out of this world ; tell him , in death I bless'd him ;
For so I will . Mine eyes grow dim . Farewell ,
My lord . Griffith , farewell . Nay , Patience ,
You must not leave me yet : I must to bed ;
Call in more women . When I am dead , good wench ,
Let me be us'd with honour : strew me over 
With maiden flowers , that all the world may know 
I was a chaste wife to my grave : embalm me ,
Then lay me forth : although unqueen'd , yet like 
A queen , and daughter to a king , inter me .
I can no more .


It's one o'clock , boy , is't not ?

It hath struck .

These should be hours for necessities ,
Not for delights ; times to repair our nature 
With comforting repose , and not for us 
To waste these times . Good hour of night , Sir Thomas !
Whither so late ?

Came you from the king , my lord ?

I did , Sir Thomas ; and left him at primero 
With the Duke of Suffolk .

I must to him too ,
Before he go to bed . I'll take my leave .

Not yet , Sir Thomas Lovell . What 's the matter ?
It seems you are in haste : an if there be 
No great offence belongs to't , give your friend 
Some touch of your late business : affairs , that walk 
As they say spirits do at midnight , have 
In them a wilder nature than the business 
That seeks dispatch by day .

My lord , I love you ,
And durst commend a secret to your ear 
Much weightier than this work . The queen's in labour ,
They say , in great extremity ; and fear'd 
She'll with the labour end .

The fruit she goes with 
I pray for heartily , that it may find 
Good time , and live : but for the stock , Sir Thomas ,
I wish it grubb'd up now .

Methinks I could 
Cry the amen ; and yet my conscience says 
She's a good creature , and , sweet lady , does 
Deserve our better wishes .

But , sir , sir ,
Hear me , Sir Thomas : you're a gentleman 
Of mine own way ; I know you wise , religious ;
And , let me tell you , it will ne'er be well ,
'Twill not , Sir Thomas Lovell , take 't of me ,
Till Cranmer , Cromwell , her two hands , and she ,
Sleep in their graves .

Now , sir , you speak of two 
The most remark'd i' the kingdom . As for Cromwell ,
Beside that of the jewel-house , is made master 
O' the rolls , and the king's secretary ; further , sir ,
Stands in the gap and trade of moe preferments ,
With which the time will load him . The archbishop 
Is the king's hand and tongue ; and who dare speak 
One syllable against him ?

Yes , yes , Sir Thomas ,
There are that dare ; and I myself have ventur'd 
To speak my mind of him : and indeed this day ,
Sir ,I may tell it you ,I think I have 
Incens'd the lords o' the council that he is 
For so I know he is , they know he is 
A most arch heretic , a pestilence 
That does infect the land : with which they mov'd 
Have broken with the king ; who hath so far 
Given ear to our complaint ,of his great grace 
And princely care , foreseeing those fell mischiefs 
Our reasons laid before him ,hath commanded 
To-morrow morning to the council-board 
He be convented . He's a rank weed , Sir Thomas ,
And we must root him out . From your affairs 
I hinder you too long : good-night , Sir Thomas !

Many good-nights , my lord . I rest your servant .

Charles , I will play no more to-night ;
My mind's not on't ; you are too hard for me .

Sir , I did never win of you before .

But little , Charles ;
Nor shall not when my fancy's on my play .
Now , Lovell , from the queen what is the news ?

I could not personally deliver to her 
What you commanded me , but by her woman 
I sent your message ; who return'd her thanks 
In the great'st humbleness , and desir'd your highness 
Most heartily to pray for her .

What sayst thou , ha ?
To pray for her ? what ! is she crying out ?

So said her woman ; and that her sufferance made 
Almost each pang a death .

Alas ! good lady .

God safely quit her of her burden , and 
With gentle travail , to the gladding of 
Your highness with an heir !

'Tis midnight , Charles ;
Prithee , to bed ; and in thy prayers remember 
The estate of my poor queen . Leave me alone ;
For I must think of that which company 
Would not be friendly to .

I wish your highness 
A quiet night ; and my good mistress will 
Remember in my prayers .

Charles , good-night .


Well , Sir , what follows ?

Sir , I have brought my lord the archbishop ,
As you commanded me .

Ha ! Canterbury ?

Ay , my good lord .

'Tis true : where is he , Denny ?

He attends your highness' pleasure .

Bring him to us .


This is about that which the bishop spake :
I am happily come hither .


Avoid the gallery .

Ha ! I have said . Begone .
What !


I am fearful . Wherefore frowns he thus ?
'Tis his aspect of terror : all's not well .

How now , my lord ! You do desire to know 
Wherefore I sent for you .

It is my duty 
To attend your highness' pleasure .

Pray you , arise ,
My good and gracious Lord of Canterbury .
Come , you and I must walk a turn together ;
I have news to tell you : come , come , give me your hand .
Ah ! my good lord , I grieve at what I speak ,
And am right sorry to repeat what follows .
I have , and most unwillingly , of late 
Heard many grievous , I do say , my lord ,
Grievous complaints of you ; which , being consider'd ,
Have mov'd us and our council , that you shall 
This morning come before us ; where , I know ,
You cannot with such freedom purge yourself ,
But that , till further trial in those charges 
Which will require your answer , you must take 
Your patience to you , and be well contented 
To make your house our Tower : you a brother of us ,
It fits we thus proceed , or else no witness 
Would come against you .

I humbly thank your highness ;
And am right glad to catch this good occasion 
Most throughly to be winnow'd , where my chaff 
And corn shall fly asunder ; for I know 
There's none stands under more calumnious tongues 
Than I myself , poor man .

Stand up , good Canterbury :
Thy truth and thy integrity is rooted 
In us , thy friend : give me thy hand , stand up :
Prithee , let's walk . Now , by my holidame ,
What manner of man are you ? My lord , I look'd 
You would have given me your petition , that 
I should have ta'en some pains to bring together 
Yourself and your accusers ; and to have heard you ,
Without indurance , further .

Most dread liege ,
The good I stand on is my truth and honesty :
If they shall fail , I , with mine enemies ,
Will triumph o'er my person ; which I weigh not ,
Being of those virtues vacant . I fear nothing 
What can be said against me .

Know you not 
How your state stands i' the world , with the whole world ?
Your enemies are many , and not small ; their practices 
Must bear the same proportion ; and not ever 
The justice and the truth o' the question carries 
The due o' the verdict with it . At what ease 
Might corrupt minds procure knaves as corrupt 
To swear against you ? such things have been done .
You are potently oppos'd , and with a malice 
Of as great size . Ween you of better luck ,
I mean in perjur'd witness , than your master ,
Whose minister you are , whiles here he liv'd 
Upon this naughty earth ? Go to , go to ;
You take a precipice for no leap of danger ,
And woo your own destruction .

God and your majesty 
Protect mine innocence ! or I fall into 
The trap is laid for me !

Be of good cheer ;
They shall no more prevail than we give way to .
Keep comfort to you ; and this morning see 
You do appear before them . If they shall chance ,
In charging you with matters , to commit you ,
The best persuasions to the contrary 
Fail not to use , and with what vehemency 
The occasion shall instruct you : if entreaties 
Will render you no remedy , this ring 
Deliver them , and your appeal to us 
There make before them . Look ! the good man weeps ;
He's honest , on mine honour . God's blest mother !
I swear he is true-hearted ; and a soul 
None better in my kingdom . Get you gone ,
And do as I have bid you .

He has strangled 
His language in his tears .


Come back : what mean you ?

I'll not come back ; the tidings that I bring 
Will make my boldness manners . Now , good angels 
Fly o'er thy royal head , and shade thy person 
Under their blessed wings !

Now , by thy looks 
I guess thy message . Is the queen deliver'd ?
Say , ay ; and of a boy .

Ay , ay , my liege ;
And of a lovely boy : the God of heaven 
Both now and ever bless her ! 'tis a girl ,
Promises boys hereafter . Sir , your queen 
Desires your visitation , and to be 
Acquainted with this stranger : 'tis as like you 
As cherry is to cherry .

Lovell !


Sir !

Give her a hundred marks . I'll to the queen .


A hundred marks ! By this light , I'll ha' more .
An ordinary groom is for such payment :
I will have more , or scold it out of him .
Said I for this the girl was like to him ?
I will have more , or else unsay't ; and now ,
While it is hot , I'll put it to the issue .


I hope I am not too late ; and yet the gentleman ,
That was sent to me from the council , pray'd me 
To make great haste . All fast ? what means this ? Ho !
Who waits there ?

Sure , you know me ?

Yes , my lord ;
But yet I cannot help you .

Why ?

Your Grace must wait till you be call'd for .


So .

This is a piece of malice . I am glad 
I came this way so happily : the king 
Shall understand it presently .

'Tis Butts ,
The king's physician . As he past along ,
How earnestly he cast his eyes upon me .
Pray heaven he sound not my disgrace ! For certain ,
This is of purpose laid by some that hate me ,
God turn their hearts ! I never sought their malice ,
To quench mine honour : they would shame to make me 
Wait else at door , a fellow-counsellor ,
'Mong boys , grooms , and lackeys . But their pleasures 
Must be fulfill'd , and I attend with patience .


I'll show your Grace the strangest sight ,

What's that , Butts ?

I think your highness saw this many a day .

Body o' me , where is it ?

There , my lord ,
The high promotion of his Grace of Canterbury ;
Who holds his state at door , 'mongst pursuivants ,
Pages , and footboys .

Ha ! 'Tis he , indeed :
Is this the honour they do one another ?
'Tis well there's one above 'em yet . I had thought 
They had parted so much honesty among 'em ,
At least , good manners ,as not thus to suffer 
A man of his place , and so near our favour ,
To dance attendance on their lordships' pleasures ,
And at the door too , like a post with packets .
By holy Mary , Butts , there's knavery :
Let 'em alone , and draw the curtain close ;
We shall hear more anon .


Speak to the business , Master secretary :
Why are we met in council ?

Please your honours ,
The chief cause concerns his Grace of Canterbury .

Has he had knowledge of it ?

Yes .

Who waits there ?

Without , my noble lords ?

Yes .

My lord archbishop :
And has done half-an-hour , to know your pleasures .

Let him come in .

Your Grace may enter now .


My good lord archbishop , I'm very sorry 
To sit here at this present and behold 
That chair stand empty : but we all are men ,
In our own natures frail , and capable 
Of our flesh ; few are angels : out of which frailty 
And want of wisdom , you , that best should teach us ,
Have misdemean'd yourself , and not a little ,
Toward the king first , then his laws , in filling 
The whole realm , by your teaching and your chaplains ,
For so we are inform'd ,with new opinions ,
Divers and dangerous ; which are heresies ,
And , not reform'd , may prove pernicious .

Which reformation must be sudden too ,
My noble lords ; for those that tame wild horses 
Pace 'em not in their hands to make 'em gentle ,
But stop their mouths with stubborn bits , and spur 'em ,
Till they obey the manage . If we suffer 
Out of our easiness and childish pity 
To one man's honour this contagious sickness ,
Farewell all physic : and what follows then ?
Commotions , uproars , with a general taint 
Of the whole state : as , of late days , our neighbours ,
The upper Germany , can dearly witness ,
Yet freshly pitied in our memories .

My good lords , hitherto in all the progress 
Both of my life and office , I have labour'd ,
And with no little study , that my teaching 
And the strong course of my authority 
Might go one way , and safely ; and the end 
Was ever , to do well : nor is there living ,
I speak it with a single heart , my lords ,
A man that more detests , more stirs against ,
Both in his private conscience and his place ,
Defacers of a public peace , than I do .
Pray heaven the king may never find a heart 
With less allegiance in it ! Men , that make 
Envy and crooked malice nourishment 
Dare bite the best . I do beseech your lordships 
That , in this case of justice , my accusers ,
Be what they will , may stand forth face to face ,
And freely urge against me .

Nay , my lord ,
That cannot be : you are a counsellor ,
And by that virtue no man dare accuse you .

My lord , because we have business of more moment ,
We will be short with you . 'Tis his highness' pleasure ,
And our consent , for better trial of you ,
From hence you be committed to the Tower ;
Where , being but a private man again ,
You shall know many dare accuse you boldly ,
More than , I fear , you are provided for .

Ah ! my good Lord of Winchester , I thank you ;
You are always my good friend : if your will pass ,
I shall both find your lordship judge and juror ,
You are so merciful . I see your end ;
'Tis my undoing : love and meekness , lord ,
Become a churchman better than ambition :
Win straying souls with modesty again ,
Cast none away . That I shall clear myself ,
Lay all the weight ye can upon my patience ,
I make as little doubt , as you do conscience ,
In doing daily wrongs . I could say more ,
But reverence to your calling makes me modest .

My lord , my lord , you are a sectary ;
That's the plain truth : your painted gloss discovers ,
To men that understand you , words and weakness .

My Lord of Winchester , you are a little ,
By your good favour , too sharp ; men so noble ,
However faulty , yet should find respect 
For what they have been : 'tis a cruelty 
To load a falling man .

Good Master secretary ,
I cry your honour mercy , you may , worst 
Of all this table , say so .

Why , my lord ?

Do not I know you for a favourer 
Of this new sect ? ye are not sound .

Not sound ?

Not sound , I say .

Would you were half so honest !
Men's prayers then would seek you , not their fears .

I shall remember this bold language .

Do .
Remember your bold life too .

This is too much ;
Forbear , for shame , my lords .

I have done .

And I .

Then thus for you , my lord : it stands agreed ,
I take it , by all voices , that forthwith 
You be convey'd to the Tower a prisoner ;
There to remain till the king's further pleasure 
Be known unto us . Are you all agreed , lords ?

We are .

Is there no other way of mercy ,
But I must needs to the Tower , my lords ?

What other 
Would you expect ? You are strangely troublesome .
Let some o' the guard be ready there .


For me ?
Must I go like a traitor thither ?

Receive him ,
And see him safe i' the Tower .

Stay , good my lords ;
I have a little yet to say . Look there , my lords ;
By virtue of that ring I take my cause 
Out of the gripes of cruel men , and give it 
To a most noble judge , the king my master .

This is the king's ring .

'Tis no counterfeit .

'Tis the right ring , by heaven ! I told ye all ,
When we first put this dangerous stone a-rolling ,
'Twould fall upon ourselves .

Do you think , my lords ,
The king will suffer but the little finger 
Of this man to be vex'd ?

'Tis now too certain :
How much more is his life in value with him ?
Would I were fairly out on't .

My mind gave me ,
In seeking tales and informations 
Against this man whose honesty the devil 
And his disciples only envy at 
Ye blew the fire that burns ye : now have at ye !


Dread sovereign , how much are we bound to heaven 
In daily thanks , that gave us such a prince ;
Not only good and wise , but most religious :
One that in all obedience makes the Church 
The chief aim of his honour ; and , to strengthen 
That holy duty , out of dear respect ,
His royal self in judgment comes to hear 
The cause betwixt her and this great offender .

You were ever good at sudden commendations ,
Bishop of Winchester ; but know , I come not 
To hear such flattery now , and in my presence ;
They are too thin and bare to hide offences .
To me you cannot reach ; you play the spaniel ,
And think with wagging of your tongue to win me ;
But , whatsoe'er thou tak'st me for , I'm sure 
Thou hast a cruel nature and a bloody .


Good man , sit down . Now let me see the proudest 
He , that dares most , but wag his finger at thee :
By all that's holy , he had better starve 
Than but once think this place becomes thee not .

May it please your Grace ,

No , sir , it does not please me .
I had thought I had had men of some understanding 
And wisdom of my council ; but I find none .
Was it discretion , lords , to let this man ,
This good man ,few of you deserve that title ,
This honest man , wait like a lousy footboy 
At chamber-door ? and one as great as you are ?
Why , what a shame was this ! Did my commission 
Bid ye so far forget yourselves ? I gave ye 
Power as he was a counsellor to try him ,
Not as a groom . There's some of ye , I see ,
More out of malice than integrity ,
Would try him to the utmost , had ye mean ;
Which ye shall never have while I live .

Thus far ,
My most dread sov'reign , may it like your Grace 
To let my tongue excuse all . What was purpos'd 
Concerning his imprisonment , was rather 
If there be faith in men meant for his trial 
And fair purgation to the world , than malice ,
I'm sure , in me .

Well , well , my lords , respect him ;
Take him , and use him well ; he's worthy of it .
I will say thus much for him , if a prince 
May be beholding to a subject , I 
Am , for his love and service , so to him .
Make me no more ado , but all embrace him :
Be friends , for shame , my lords ! My Lord of Canterbury ,
I have a suit which you must not deny me ;
That is , a fair young maid that yet wants baptism ,
You must be godfather , and answer for her .

The greatest monarch now alive may glory 
In such an honour : how may I deserve it ,
That am a poor and humble subject to you ?

Come , come , my lord , you'd spare your spoons : you shall have two noble partners with you ; the old Duchess of Norfolk , and Lady Marquess Dorset : will these please you ?
Once more , my Lord of Winchester , I charge you ,
Embrace and love this man .

With a true heart 
And brother-love I do it .

And let heaven 
Witness , how dear I hold this confirmation .

Good man ! those joyful tears show thy true heart :
The common voice , I see , is verified 
Of thee , which says thus , 'Do my Lord of Canterbury 
A shrewd turn , and he is your friend for ever .' 
Come , lords , we trifle time away ; I long 
To have this young one made a Christian .
As I have made ye one , lords , one remain ;
So I grow stronger , you more honour gain .


You'll leave your noise anon , ye rascals .
Do you take the court for Paris-garden ? ye rude slaves , leave your gaping .


Good Master porter , I belong to the larder .

Belong to the gallows , and be hanged , you rogue ! Is this a place to roar in ? Fetch me a dozen crab-tree staves , and strong ones : these are but switches to 'em . I'll scratch your heads : you must be seeing christenings ! Do you look for ale and cakes here , you rude rascals ?

Pray , sir , be patient : 'tis as much impossible 
Unless we sweep 'em from the door with cannons 
To scatter 'em , as 'tis to make 'em sleep 
On May-day morning ; which will never be .
We may as well push against Paul's as stir 'em .

How got they in , and be hang'd ?

Alas , I know not ; how gets the tide in ?
As much as one sound cudgel of four foot 
You see the poor remainder could distribute ,
I made no spare , sir .

You did nothing , sir .

I am not Samson , nor Sir Guy , nor Colbrand ,
To mow 'em down before me ; but if I spar'd any 
That had a head to hit , either young or old ,
He or she , cuckold or cuckold-maker ,
Let me ne'er hope to see a chine again ;
And that I would not for a cow , God save her !


Do you hear , Master porter ?

I shall be with you presently , good 
Master puppy . Keep the door close , sirrah .

What would you have me do ?

What should you do , but knock 'em down by the dozens ? Is this Moorfields to muster in ? or have we some strange Indian with the great tool come to court , the women so besiege us ? Bless me , what a fry of fornication is at door ! On my Christian conscience , this one christening will beget a thousand : here will be father , godfather , and all together .

The spoons will be the bigger , sir . There is a fellow somewhat near the door , he should be a brazier by his face , for , o' my conscience , twenty of the dog days now reign in's nose : all that stand about him are under the line , they need no other penance . That fire-drake did I hit three times on the head , and three times was his nose discharged against me : he stands there , like a mortar-piece , to blow us . There was a haberdasher's wife of small wit near him , that railed upon me till her pinked porringer fell off her head , for kindling such a combustion in the state . I missed the meteor once , and hit that woman , who cried out , 'Clubs !' when I might see from far some forty truncheoners draw to her succour , which were the hope o' the Strand , where she was quartered . They fell on ; I made good my place ; at length they came to the broomstaff to me ; I defied 'em still ; when suddenly a file of boys behind 'em , loose shot , delivered such a shower of pebbles , that I was fain to draw mine honour in , and let 'em win the work . The devil was amongst 'em , I think , surely .

These are the youths that thunder at a playhouse , and fight for bitten apples ; that no audience , but the Tribulation of Tower-hill , or the Limbs of Limehouse , their dear brothers , are able to endure . I have some of 'em in Limbo Patrum , and there they are like to dance these three days ; besides the running banquet of two beadles , that is to come .


Mercy o' me , what a multitude are here !
They grow still too , from all parts they are coming ,
As if we kept a fair here ! Where are these porters ,
These lazy knaves ? Ye have made a fine hand , fellows :
There's a trim rabble let in . Are all these 
Your faithful friends o' the suburbs ? We shall have 
Great store of room , no doubt , left for the ladies ,
When they pass back from the christening .

An't please your honour ,
We are but men ; and what so many may do ,
Not being torn a-pieces , we have done :
An army cannot rule 'em .

As I live ,
If the king blame me for't , I'll lay ye all 
By the heels , and suddenly ; and on your heads 
Clap round fines for neglect : ye're lazy knaves ;
And here ye lie baiting of bombards , when 
Ye should do service . Hark ! the trumpets sound ;
They're come already from the christening .
Go , break among the press , and find a way out 
To let the troop pass fairly , or I'll find 
A Marshalsea shall hold ye play these two months .

Make way there for the princess .

You great fellow ,
Stand close up , or I'll make your head ache .

You i' the camlet , get up o' the rail :
I'll pick you o'er the pales else .

Heaven , from thy endless goodness , send prosperous life , long , and ever happy , to the high and mighty Princess of England , Elizabeth !


And to your royal Grace , and the good queen ,
My noble partners , and myself , thus pray :
All comfort , joy , in this most gracious lady ,
Heaven ever laid up to make parents happy ,
May hourly fall upon ye !

Thank you , good lord archbishop :
What is her name ?

Elizabeth .

Stand up , lord .

With this kiss take my blessing ; God protect thee !
Into whose hand I give thy life .

Amen .

My noble gossips , ye have been too prodigal :
I thank ye heartily : so shall this lady 
When she has so much English .

Let me speak , sir ,
For heaven now bids me ; and the words I utter 
Let none think flattery , for they'll find 'em truth .
This royal infant ,heaven still move about her !
Though in her cradle , yet now promises 
Upon this land a thousand thousand blessings ,
Which time shall bring to ripeness : she shall be 
But few now living can behold that goodness 
A pattern to all princes living with her ,
And all that shall succeed : Saba was never 
More covetous of wisdom and fair virtue 
Than this pure soul shall be : all princely graces ,
That mould up such a mighty piece as this is ,
With all the virtues that attend the good ,
Shall still be doubled on her ; truth shall nurse her ;
Holy and heavenly thoughts still counsel her ;
She shall be lov'd and fear'd ; her own shall bless her ;
Her foes shake like a field of beaten corn ,
And hang their heads with sorrow ; good grows with her .
In her days every man shall eat in safety 
Under his own vine what he plants ; and sing 
The merry songs of peace to all his neighbours .
God shall be truly known ; and those about her 
From her shall read the perfect ways of honour ,
And by those claim their greatness , not by blood .
Nor shall this peace sleep with her ; but as when 
The bird of wonder dies , the maiden ph nix ,
Her ashes new-create another heir 
As great in admiration as herself ,
So shall she leave her blessedness to one ,
When heaven shall call her from this cloud of darkness ,
Who , from the sacred ashes of her honour ,
Shall star-like rise , as great in fame as she was ,
And so stand fix'd . Peace , plenty , love , truth , terror ,
That were the servants to this chosen infant ,
Shall then be his , and like a vine grow to him :
Wherever the bright sun of heaven shall shine ,
His honour and the greatness of his name 
Shall be , and make new nations ; he shall flourish ,
And , like a mountain cedar , reach his branches 
To all the plains about him ; our children's children 
Shall see this , and bless heaven .

Thou speakest wonders .

She shall be , to the happiness of England ,
An aged princess ; many days shall see her ,
And yet no day without a deed to crown it .
Would I had known no more ! but she must die ,
She must , the saints must have her , yet a virgin ;
A most unspotted lily shall she pass 
To the ground , and all the world shall mourn her .

O lord archbishop !
Thou hast made me now a man : never , before 
This happy child , did I get any thing .
This oracle of comfort has so pleas'd me ,
That when I am in heaven , I shall desire 
To see what this child does , and praise my Maker .
I thank ye all . To you , my good Lord Mayor ,
And your good brethren , I am much beholding ;
I have receiv'd much honour by your presence ,
And ye shall find me thankful . Lead the way , lords :
Ye must all see the queen , and she must thank ye ;
She will be sick else . This day , no man think 
He has business at his house ; for all shall stay :
This little one shall make it holiday .


'Tis ten to one , this play can never please 
All that are here : some come to take their ease 
And sleep an act or two ; but those , we fear ,
We've frighted with our trumpets ; so , 'tis clear 
They'll say 'tis naught : others , to hear the city 
Abus'd extremely , and to cry , 'That's witty !' 
Which we have not done neither : that , I fear ,
All the expected good we're like to hear 
For this play at this time , is only in 
The merciful construction of good women ;
For such a one we show'd 'em : if they smile ,
And say 'twill do , I know , within a while 
All the best men are ours ; for 'tis ill hap 
If they hold when their ladies bid 'em clap .

THE FIRST PART OF KING HENRY IV

So shaken as we are , so wan with care ,
Find we a time for frighted peace to pant ,
And breathe short-winded accents of new broils 
To be commenc'd in stronds afar remote .
No more the thirsty entrance of this soil 
Shall daub her lips with her own children's blood ;
No more shall trenching war channel her fields ,
Nor bruise her flowerets with the armed hoofs 
Of hostile paces : those opposed eyes ,
Which , like the meteors of a troubled heaven ,
All of one nature , of one substance bred ,
Did lately meet in the intestine shock 
And furious close of civil butchery ,
Shall now , in mutual well-beseeming ranks ,
March all one way , and be no more oppos'd 
Against acquaintance , kindred , and allies :
The edge of war , like an ill-sheathed knife ,
No more shall cut his master . Therefore , friends ,
As far as to the sepulchre of Christ ,
Whose soldier now , under whose blessed cross 
We are impressed and engag'd to fight ,
Forthwith a power of English shall we levy ,
Whose arms were moulded in their mother's womb 
To chase these pagans in those holy fields 
Over whose acres walk'd those blessed feet 
Which fourteen hundred years ago were nail'd 
For our advantage on the bitter cross .
But this our purpose is a twelvemonth old ,
And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go :
Therefore we meet not now . Then let me hear 
Of you , my gentle cousin Westmoreland ,
What yesternight our council did decree 
In forwarding this dear expedience .

My liege , this haste was hot in question ,
And many limits of the charge set down 
But yesternight ; when all athwart there came 
A post from Wales loaden with heavy news ;
Whose worst was , that the noble Mortimer ,
Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight 
Against the irregular and wild Glendower ,
Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken ,
And a thousand of his people butchered ;
Upon whose dead corpse' there was such misuse ,
Such beastly shameless transformation 
By those Welshwomen done , as may not be 
Without much shame re-told or spoken of .

It seems then that the tidings of this broil 
Brake off our business for the Holy Land .

This match'd with other like , my gracious lord ;
For more uneven and unwelcome news 
Came from the north and thus it did import :
On Holy-rood day , the gallant Hotspur there ,
Young Harry Percy and brave Archibald ,
That ever-valiant and approved Scot ,
At Holmedon met ,
Where they did spend a sad and bloody hour ;
As by discharge of their artillery ,
And shape of likelihood , the news was told ;
For he that brought them , in the very heat 
And pride of their contention did take horse ,
Uncertain of the issue any way .

Here is a dear and true industrious friend ,
Sir Walter Blunt , new lighted from his horse ,
Stain'd with the variation of each soil 
Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours ;
And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news .
The Earl of Douglas is discomfited ;
Ten thousand bold Scots , two and twenty knights ,
Balk'd in their own blood did Sir Walter see 
On Holmedon's plains : of prisoners Hotspur took 
Mordake the Earl of Fife , and eldest son 
To beaten Douglas , and the Earls of Athol ,
Of Murray , Angus , and Menteith .
And is not this an honourable spoil ?
A gallant prize ? ha , cousin , is it not ?

In faith ,
It is a conquest for a prince to boast of .

Yea , there thou mak'st me sad and mak'st me sin 
In envy that my Lord Northumberland 
Should be the father to so blest a son ,
A son who is the theme of honour's tongue ;
Amongst a grove the very straightest plant ;
Who is sweet Fortune's minion and her pride :
Whilst I , by looking on the praise of him ,
See riot and dishonour stain the brow 
Of my young Harry . O ! that it could be prov'd 
That some night-tripping fairy had exchang'd 
In cradle-clothes our children where they lay ,
And call'd mine Percy , his Plantagenet .
Then would I have his Harry , and he mine .
But let him from my thoughts . What think you , coz ,
Of this young Percy's pride ? the prisoners ,
Which he in this adventure hath surpris'd ,
To his own use he keeps , and sends me word ,
I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife .

This is his uncle's teaching , this is Worcester ,
Malevolent to you in all aspects ;
Which makes him prune himself , and bristle up 
The crest of youth against your dignity .

But I have sent for him to answer this ;
And for this cause a while we must neglect 
Our holy purpose to Jerusalem .
Cousin , on Wednesday next our council we 
Will hold at Windsor ; so inform the lords :
But come yourself with speed to us again ;
For more is to be said and to be done 
Than out of anger can be uttered .

I will , my hege .


Now , Hal , what time of day is it , lad ?

Thou art so fat-witted , with drinking of old sack , and unbuttoning thee after supper , and sleeping upon benches after noon , that thou hast forgotten to demand that truly which thou wouldst truly know . What a devil hast thou to do with the time of the day ? unless hours were cups of sack , and minutes capons , and clocks the tongues of bawds , and dials the signs of leaping-houses , and the blessed sun himself a fair hot wench in flame-colour'd taffeta , I see no reason why thou shouldst be so superfluous to demand the time of the day .

Indeed , you come near me now , Hal ; for we that take purses go by the moon and the seven stars , and not by Ph bus , he , 'that wandering knight so fair .' And , I prithee , sweet wag , when thou art king ,as , God save thy Grace ,majesty , I should say , for grace thou wilt have none ,

What ! none ?

No , by my troth ; not so much as will serve to be prologue to an egg and butter .

Well , how then ? come , roundly , roundly .

Marry , then , sweet wag , when thou art king , let not us that are squires of the night's body be called thieves of the day's beauty : let us be Diana's foresters , gentlemen of the shade , minions of the moon ; and let men say , we be men of good government , being governed as the sea is , by our noble and chaste mistress the moon , under whose countenance we steal .

Thou sayest well , and it holds well too ; for the fortune of us that are the moon's men doth ebb and flow like the sea , being governed as the sea is , by the moon . As for proof now : a purse of gold most resolutely snatched on Monday night and most dissolutely spent on Tuesday morning ; got with swearing 'Lay by ;' and spent with crying 'Bring in :' now in as low an ebb as the foot of the ladder , and by and by in as high a flow as the ridge of the gallows .

By the Lord , thou sayest true , lad . And is not my hostess of the tavern a most sweet wench ?

As the honey of Hybla , my old lad of the castle . And is not a buff jerkin a most sweet robe of durance ?

How now , how now , mad wag ! what , in thy quips and thy quiddities ? what a plague have I to do with a buff jerkin ?

Why , what a pox have I to do with my hostess of the tavern ?

Well , thou hast called her to a reckoning many a time and oft .

Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part ?

No ; I'll give thee thy due , thou hast paid all there .

Yea , and elsewhere , so far as my coin would stretch ; and where it would not , I have used my credit .

Yea , and so used it that , were it not here apparent that thou art their apparent .But , I prithee , sweet wag , shall there be gallows standing in England when thou art king , and resolution thus fobbed as it is with the rusty curb of old father antick the law ? Do not thou , when thou art king , hang a thief .

No ; thou shalt .

Shall I ? O rare ! By the Lord , I'll be a brave judge .

Thou judgest false already ; I mean , thou shalt have the hanging of the thieves and so become a rare hangman .

Well , Hal , well ; and in some sort it jumps with my humour as well as waiting in the court , I can tell you .

For obtaining of suits ?

Yea , for obtaining of suits , whereof the hangman hath no lean wardrobe . 'Sblood , I am as melancholy as a gib cat , or a lugged bear .

Or an old lion , or a lover's lute .

Yea , or the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe .

What sayest thou to a hare , or the melancholy of Moor-ditch ?

Thou hast the most unsavory similes , and art , indeed , the most comparative , rascalliest , sweet young prince ; but , Hal , I prithee , trouble me no more with vanity . I would to God thou and I knew where a commodity of good names were to be bought . An old lord of the council rated me the other day in the street about you , sir , but I marked him not ; and yet he talked very wisely , but I regarded him not ; and yet he talked wisely , and in the street too .

Thou didst well ; for wisdom cries out in the streets , and no man regards it .

O ! thou hast damnable iteration , and art indeed able to corrupt a saint . Thou hast done much harm upon me , Hal ; God forgive thee for it ! Before I knew thee , Hal , I knew nothing ; and now am I , if a man should speak truly , little better than one of the wicked . I must give over this life , and I will give it over ; by the Lord , an I do not , I am a villain : I'll be damned for never a king's son in Christendom .

Where shall we take a purse to-morrow , Jack ?

Zounds ! where thou wilt , lad , I'll make one ; an I do not , call me a villain and baffle me .

I see a good amendment of life in thee ; from praying to purse-taking .


Why , Hal , 'tis my vocation , Hal ; 'tis no sin for a man to labour in his vocation . Poins ! Now shall we know if Gadshill have set a match . O ! if men were to be saved by merit , what hole in hell were hot enough for him ? This is the most omnipotent villain that ever cried 'Stand !' to a true man .

Good morrow , Ned .

Good morrow , sweet Hal . What says Monsieur Remorse ? What says Sir John Sack-and-Sugar ? Jack ! how agrees the devil and thee about thy soul , that thou soldest him on Good-Friday last for a cup of Madeira and a cold capon's leg ?

Sir John stands to his word , the devil shall have his bargain ; for he was never yet a breaker of proverbs : he will give the devil his due .

Then art thou damned for keeping thy word with the devil .

Else he had been damned for cozening the devil .

But my lads , my lads , to-morrow morning , by four o'clock , early at Gadshill ! There are pilgrims going to Canterbury with rich offerings , and traders riding to London with fat purses : I have vizards for you all ; you have horses for yourselves . Gadshill lies to night in Rochester ; I have bespoke supper to-morrow night in Eastcheap : we may do it as secure as sleep . If you will go I will stuff your purses full of crowns ; if you will not , tarry at home and be hanged .

Hear ye , Yedward : if I tarry at home and go not , I'll hang you for going .

You will , chops ?

Hal , wilt thou make one ?

Who , I rob ? I a thief ? not I , by my faith .

There's neither honesty , manhood , nor good fellowship in thee , nor thou camest not of the blood royal , if thou darest not stand for ten shillings .

Well , then , once in my days I'll be a madcap .

Why , that's well said .

Well , come what will , I'll tarry at home .

By the Lord , I'll be a traitor then , when thou art king .

I care not .

Sir John , I prithee , leave the prince and me alone : I will lay him down such reasons for this adventure that he shall go .

Well , God give thee the spirit of persuasion and him the ears of profiting , that what thou speakest may move , and what he hears may be believed , that the true prince may , for recreation sake , prove a false thief ; for the poor abuses of the time want countenance . Farewell : you shall find me in Eastcheap .

Farewell , thou latter spring ! Farewell , All-hallown summer !


Now , my good sweet honey lord , ride with us to-morrow : I have a jest to execute that I cannot manage alone . Falstaff , Bardolph , Peto , and Gadshill shall rob those men that we have already waylaid ; yourself and I will not be there ; and when they have the booty , if you and I do not rob them , cut this head from my shoulders .

But how shall we part with them in setting forth ?

Why , we will set forth before or after them , and appoint them a place of meeting , wherein it is at our pleasure to fail ; and then will they adventure upon the exploit themselves , which they shall have no sooner achieved but we'll set upon them .

Yea , but 'tis like that they will know us by our horses , by our habits , and by every other appointment , to be ourselves .

Tut ! our horses they shall not see , I'll tie them in the wood ; our vizards we will change after we leave them ; and , sirrah , I have cases of buckram for the nonce , to inmask our noted outward garments .

Yea , but I doubt they will be too hard for us .

Well , for two of them , I know them to be as true-bred cowards as ever turned back ; and for the third , if he fight longer than he sees reason , I'll forswear arms . The virtue of this jest will be , the incomprehensible lies that this same fat rogue will tell us when we meet at supper : how thirty , at least , he fought with ; what wards , what blows , what extremities he endured ; and in the reproof of this lies the jest .

Well , I'll go with thee : provide us all things necessary and meet me to-morrow night in Eastcheap ; there I'll sup . Farewell .

Farewell , my lord .


I know you all , and will awhile uphold 
The unyok'd humour of your idleness :
Yet herein will I imitate the sun ,
Who doth permit the base contagious clouds 
To smother up his beauty from the world ,
That when he please again to be himself ,
Being wanted , he may be more wonder'd at ,
By breaking through the foul and ugly mists 
Of vapours that did seem to strangle him .
If all the year were playing holidays ,
To sport would be as tedious as to work ;
But when they seldom come , they wish'd for come ,
And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents .
So , when this loose behaviour I throw off ,
And pay the debt I never promised ,
By how much better than my word I am 
By so much shall I falsify men's hopes ;
And like bright metal on a sullen ground ,
My reformation , glittering o'er my fault ,
Shall show more goodly and attract more eyes 
Than that which hath no foil to set it off .
I'll so offend to make offence a skill ;
Redeeming time when men think least I will .


My blood hath been too cold and temperate ,
Unapt to stir at these indignities ,
And you have found me ; for accordingly 
You tread upon my patience : but , be sure ,
I will from henceforth rather be myself ,
Mighty , and to be fear'd , than my condition ,
Which hath been smooth as oil , soft as young down ,
And therefore lost that title of respect 
Which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud .

Our house , my sovereign liege , little deserves 
The scourge of greatness to be us'd on it ;
And that same greatness too which our own hands 
Have holp to make so portly .

My lord ,

Worcester , get thee gone ; for I do see 
Danger and disobedience in thine eye .
O , sir , your presence is too bold and peremptory ,
And majesty might never yet endure 
The moody frontier of a servant brow .
You have good leave to leave us ; when we need 
Your use and counsel we shall send for you .

You were about to speak .

Yea , my good lord .
Those prisoners in your highness' name demanded ,
Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took ,
Were , as he says , not with such strength denied 
As is deliver'd to your majesty :
Either envy , therefore , or misprision 
Is guilty of this fault and not my son .

My liege , I did deny no prisoners :
But I remember , when the fight was done ,
When I was dry with rage and extreme toil ,
Breathless and faint , leaning upon my sword ,
Came there a certain lord , neat , and trimly dress'd ,
Fresh as a bridegroom ; and his chin , new reap'd ,
Show'd like a stubble-land at harvest-home :
He was perfumed like a milliner ,
And 'twixt his finger and his thumb he held 
A pouncet-box , which ever and anon 
He gave his nose and took't away again ;
Who therewith angry , when it next came there ,
Took it in snuff : and still he smil'd and talk'd ;
And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by ,
He call'd them untaught knaves , unmannerly ,
To bring a slovenly unhandsome corpse 
Betwixt the wind and his nobility .
With many holiday and lady terms 
He question'd me ; among the rest , demanded 
My prisoners in your majesty's behalf .
I then all smarting with my wounds being cold ,
To be so pester'd with a popinjay ,
Out of my grief and my impatience 
Answer'd neglectingly , I know not what ,
He should , or he should not ; for he made me mad 
To see him shine so brisk and smell so sweet 
And talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman 
Of guns , and drums , and wounds ,God save the mark !
And telling me the sovereign'st thing on earth 
Was parmaceti for an inward bruise ;
And that it was great pity , so it was ,
This villanous saltpetre should be digg'd 
Out of the bowels of the harmless earth ,
Which many a good tall fellow had destroy'd 
So cowardly ; and but for these vile guns ,
He would himself have been a soldier .
This bald unjointed chat of his , my lord ,
I answer'd indirectly , as I said ;
And I beseech you , let not his report 
Come current for an accusation 
Betwixt my love and your high majesty .

The circumstance consider'd , good my lord ,
Whatever Harry Percy then had said 
To such a person and in such a place ,
At such a time , with all the rest re-told ,
May reasonably die and never rise 
To do him wrong , or any way impeach 
What then he said , so he unsay it now .

Why , yet he doth deny his prisoners ,
But with proviso and exception ,
That we at our own charge shall ransom straight 
His brother-in-law , the foolish Mortimer ;
Who , on my soul , hath wilfully betray'd 
The lives of those that he did lead to fight 
Against the great magician , damn'd Glendower ,
Whose daughter , as we hear , the Earl of March 
Hath lately married . Shall our coffers then 
Be emptied to redeem a traitor home ?
Shall we buy treason , and indent with fears ,
When they have lost and forfeited themselves ?
No , on the barren mountains let him starve ;
For I shall never hold that man my friend 
Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost 
To ransom home revolted Mortimer .

Revolted Mortimer !
He never did fall off , my sovereign liege ,
But by the chance of war : to prove that true 
Needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds ,
Those mouthed wounds , which valiantly he took ,
When on the gentle Severn's sedgy bank ,
In single opposition , hand to hand ,
He did confound the best part of an hour 
In changing hardiment with great Glendower .
Three times they breath'd and three times did they drink ,
Upon agreement , of swift Severn's flood ,
Who then , affrighted with their bloody looks ,
Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds ,
And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank 
Blood-stained with these valiant combatants .
Never did base and rotten policy 
Colour her working with such deadly wounds ;
Nor never could the noble Mortimer 
Receive so many , and all willingly :
Then let him not be slander'd with revolt .

Thou dost belie him , Percy , thou dost belie him :
He never did encounter with Glendower :
I tell thee ,
He durst as well have met the devil alone 
As Owen Glendower for an enemy .
Art thou not asham'd ? But , sirrah , henceforth 
Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer :
Send me your prisoners with the speediest means ,
Or you shall hear in such a kind from me 
As will displease you . My Lord Northumberland ,
We license your departure with your son .
Send us your prisoners , or you'll hear of it .


An if the devil come and roar for them ,
I will not send them : I will after straight 
And tell him so ; for I will ease my heart ,
Albeit I make a hazard of my head .

What ! drunk with choler ? stay , and pause awhile :
Here comes your uncle .


Speak of Mortimer !
'Zounds ! I will speak of him ; and let my soul 
Want mercy if I do not join with him :
In his behalf I'll empty all these veins ,
And shed my dear blood drop by drop i' the dust ,
But I will lift the down-trod Mortimer 
As high i' the air as this unthankful king ,
As this ingrate and canker'd Bolingbroke .

Brother , the king hath made your nephew mad .

Who struck this heat up after I was gone ?

He will , forsooth , have all my prisoners ;
And when I urg'd the ransom once again 
Of my wife's brother , then his cheek look'd pale ,
And on my face he turn'd an eye of death ,
Trembling even at the name of Mortimer .

I cannot blame him : was he not proclaim'd 
By Richard that dead is the next of blood ?

He was ; I heard the proclamation :
And then it was when the unhappy king ,
Whose wrongs in us God pardon !did set forth 
Upon his Irish expedition ;
From whence he , intercepted , did return 
To be depos'd , and shortly murdered .

And for whose death we in the world's wide mouth 
Live scandaliz'd and foully spoken of .

But , soft ! I pray you , did King Richard then 
Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer 
Heir to the crown ?

He did ; myself did hear it .

Nay , then I cannot blame his cousin king ,
That wish'd him on the barren mountains starve .
But shall it be that you , that set the crown 
Upon the head of this forgetful man ,
And for his sake wear the detested blot 
Of murd'rous subornation , shall it be ,
That you a world of curses undergo ,
Being the agents , or base second means ,
The cords , the ladder , or the hangman rather ?
O ! pardon me that I descend so low ,
To show the line and the predicament 
Wherein you range under this subtle king .
Shall it for shame be spoken in these days ,
Or fill up chronicles in time to come ,
That men of your nobility and power ,
Did gage them both in'an unjust behalf ,
As both of you God pardon it !have done ,
To put down Richard , that sweet lovely rose ,
And plant this thorn , this canker , Bolingbroke ?
And shall it in more shame be further spoken ,
That you are fool'd , discarded , and shook off 
By him for whom these shames ye underwent ?
No ; yet time serves wherein you may redeem 
Your banish'd honours , and restore yourselves 
Into the good thoughts of the world again ;
Revenge the jeering and disdain'd contempt 
Of this proud king , who studies day and night 
To answer all the debt he owes to you ,
Even with the bloody payment of your deaths .
Therefore , I say ,

Peace , cousin ! say no more :
And now I will unclasp a secret book ,
And to your quick-conceiving discontents 
I'll read you matter deep and dangerous ,
As full of peril and adventurous spirit 
As to o'er-walk a current roaring loud ,
On the unsteadfast footing of a spear .

If he fall in , good night ! or sink or swim :
Send danger from the east unto the west ,
So honour cross it from the north to south ,
And let them grapple : O ! the blood more stirs 
To rouse a lion than to start a hare .

Imagination of some great exploit 
Drives him beyond the bounds of patience .

By heaven methinks it were an easy leap 
To pluck bright honour from the pale-fac'd moon ,
Or dive into the bottom of the deep ,
Where fathom-line could never touch the ground ,
And pluck up drowned honour by the locks ;
So he that doth redeem her thence might wear 
Without corrival all her dignities :
But out upon this half-fac'd fellowship !

He apprehends a world of figures here ,
But not the form of what he should attend .
Good cousin , give me audience for a while .

I cry you mercy .

Those same noble Scots 
That are your prisoners ,

I'll keep them all ;
By God , he shall not have a Scot of them :
No , if a Scot would save his soul , he shall not :
I'll keep them , by this hand .

You start away ,
And lend no ear unto my purposes .
Those prisoners you shall keep .

Nay , I will ; that's flat :
He said he would not ransom Mortimer ;
Forbade my tongue to speak of Mortimer ;
But I will find him when he lies asleep ,
And in his ear I'll holla 'Mortimer !' 
Nay ,
I'll have a starling shall be taught to speak 
Nothing but 'Mortimer ,' and give it him ,
To keep his anger still in motion .

Hear you , cousin ; a word .

All studies here I solemnly defy ,
Save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke :
And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales ,
But that I think his father loves him not ,
And would be glad he met with some mischance ,
I would have him poison'd with a pot of ale .

Farewell , kinsman : I will talk to you 
When you are better temper'd to attend .

Why , what a wasp-stung and impatient fool 
Art thou to break into this woman's mood ,
Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own !

Why , look you , I am whipp'd and scourg'd with rods ,
Nettled , and stung with pismires , when I hear 
Of this vile politician , Bolingbroke .
In Richard's time ,what do ye call the place ?
A plague upon't it is in Gloucestershire ;
'Twas where the madcap duke his uncle kept ,
His uncle York ; where I first bow'd my knee 
Unto this king of smiles , this Bolingbroke ,
'Sblood !
When you and he came back from Ravenspurgh .

At Berkeley Castle .

You say true .
Why , what a candy deal of courtesy 
This fawning greyhound then did proffer me !
Look , 'when his infant fortune came to age ,' 
And 'gentle Harry Percy ,' and 'kind cousin .' 
O ! the devil take such cozeners . God forgive me !
Good uncle , tell your tale , for I have done .

Nay , if you have not , to't again ;
We'll stay your leisure .

I have done , i' faith .

Then once more to your Scottish prisoners .
Deliver them up without their ransom straight ,
And make the Douglas' son your only mean 
For powers in Scotland ; which , for divers reasons 
Which I shall send you written , be assur'd ,
Will easily be granted .

You , my lord ,
Your son in Scotland being thus employ'd ,
Shall secretly into the bosom creep 
Of that same noble prelate well belov'd ,
The Archbishop .

Of York , is it not ?

True ; who bears hard 
His brother's death at Bristol , the Lord Scroop .
I speak not this in estimation ,
As what I think might be , but what I know 
Is ruminated , plotted and set down ;
And only stays but to behold the face 
Of that occasion that shall bring it on .

I smell it .
Upon my life it will do wondrous well .

Before the game's afoot thou still lett'st slip .

Why , it cannot choose but be a noble plot :
And then the power of Scotland and of York ,
To join with Mortimer , ha ?

And so they shall .

In faith , it is exceedingly well aim'd .

And 'tis no little reason bids us speed ,
To save our heads by raising of a head ;
For , bear ourselves as even as we can ,
The king will always think him in our debt ,
And think we think ourselves unsatisfied ,
Till he hath found a time to pay us home .
And see already how he doth begin 
To make us strangers to his looks of love .

He does , he does : we'll be reveng'd on him .

Cousin , farewell : no further go in this ,
Than I by letters shall direct your course .
When time is ripe ,which will be suddenly ,
I'll steal to Glendower and Lord Mortimer ;
Where you and Douglas and our powers at once ,
As I will fashion it ,shall happily meet ,
To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms ,
Which now we hold at much uncertainty .

Farewell , good brother : we shall thrive , I trust .

Uncle , adieu : O ! let the hours be short ,
Till fields and blows and groans applaud our sport !

Heigh-ho ! An't be not four by the day I'll be hanged : Charles' Wain is over the new chimney , and yet our horse not packed . What , ostler !

Anon , anon .

I prithee , Tom , beat Cut's saddle , put a few flocks in the point ; the poor jade is wrung in the withers out of all cess .


Peas and beans are as dank here as a dog , and that is the next way to give poor jades the bots ; this house is turned upside down since Robin Ostler died .

Poor fellow ! never joyed since the price of oats rose ; it was the death of him .

I think this be the most villanous house in all London road for fleas : I am stung like a tench .

Like a tench ! by the mass , there is ne'er a king christen could be better bit than I have been since the first cock .

Why , they will allow us ne'er a jordan , and then we leak in the chimney ; and your chamber-lie breeds fleas like a loach .

What , ostler ! come away and be hanged , come away .

I have a gammon of bacon and two razes of ginger , to be delivered as far as Charing-cross .

Godsbody ! the turkeys in my pannier are quite starved . What , ostler ! A plague on thee ! hast thou never an eye in thy head ? canst not hear ? An 'twere not as good a deed as drink to break the pate on thee , I am a very villain . Come , and be hanged ! hast no faith in thee ?


Good morrow , carriers . What's o'clock ?

I think it be two o'clock .

I prithee , lend me thy lanthorn , to see my gelding in the stable .

Nay , by God , soft : I know a trick worth two of that , i' faith .

I prithee , lend me thine .

Ay , when ? canst tell ? Lend me thy lanthorn , quoth a' ? marry , I'll see thee hanged first .

Sirrah carrier , what time do you mean to come to London ?

Time enough to go to bed with a candle , I warrant thee . Come , neighbour Mugs , we'll call up the gentlemen : they will along with company , for they have great charge .


What , ho ! chamberlain !

'At hand , quoth pick-purse .' 

That's even as fair as , 'at hand , quoth the chamberlain' ; for thou variest no more from picking of purses than giving direction doth from labouring ; thou layest the plot how .


Good morrow , Master Gadshill . It holds current that I told you yesternight : there's a franklin in the wild of Kent hath brought three hundred marks with him in gold : I heard him tell it to one of his company last night at supper ; a kind of auditor ; one that hath abundance of charge too , God knows what . They are up already and call for eggs and butter : they will away presently .

Sirrah , if they meet not with Saint Nicholas' clerks , I'll give thee this neck .

No , I'll none of it : I prithee , keep that for the hangman ; for I know thou worship'st Saint Nicholas as truly as a man of falsehood may .

What talkest thou to me of the hangman ? If I hang I'll make a fat pair of gallows ; for if I hang , old Sir John hangs with me , and thou knowest he's no starveling . Tut ! there are other Troyans that thou dreamest not of , the which for sport sake are content to do the profession some grace ; that would , if matters should be looked into , for their own credit sake make all whole . I am joined with no foot-land-rakers , no long-staff sixpenny strikers , none of these mad mustachio-purple-hued malt worms ; but with nobility and tranquillity , burgomasters and great oneyers such as can hold in , such as will strike sooner than speak , and speak sooner than drink , and drink sooner than pray : and yet I lie ; for they pray continually to their saint , the commonwealth ; or , rather , not pray to her , but prey on her , for they ride up and down on her and make her their boots .

What ! the commonwealth their boots ? will she hold out water in foul way ?

She will , she will ; justice hath liquored her . We steal as in a castle , cock-sure ; we have the receipt of fern-seed , we walk invisible .

Nay , by my faith , I think you are more beholding to the night than to fern-seed for your walking invisible .

Give me thy hand : thou shalt have a share in our purchase , as I am a true man .

Nay , rather let me have it , as you are a false thief .

Go to ; homo is a common name to all men . Bid the ostler bring my gelding out of the stable . Farewell , you muddy knave .


Come , shelter , shelter : I have removed Falstaff's horse , and he frets like a gummed velvet .

Stand close .


Poins ! Poins , and be hanged ! Poins !

Peace , ye fat-kidneyed rascal ! What a brawling dost thou keep !

Where's Poins , Hal ?

He is walked up to the top of the hill : I'll go seek him .


I am accursed to rob in that thief's company ; the rascal hath removed my horse and tied him I know not where . If I travel but four foot by the squire further afoot I shall break my wind . Well , I doubt not but to die a fair death for all this , if I 'scape hanging for killing that rogue . I have forsworn his company hourly any time this two-and-twenty years , and yet I am bewitched with the rogue's company . If the rascal have not given me medicines to make me love him , I'll be hanged : it could not be else : I have drunk medicines . Poins ! Hal ! a plague upon you both ! Bardolph ! Peto ! I'll starve ere I'll rob a foot further . An 'twere not as good a deed as drink to turn true man and leave these rogues , I am the veriest varlet that ever chewed with a tooth . Eight yards of uneven ground is threescore and ten miles afoot with me , and the stony-hearted villains know it well enough . A plague upon't when thieves cannot be true one to another !

Whew ! A plague upon you all ! Give me my horse , you rogues ; give me my horse and be hanged .

Peace , ye fatguts ! lie down : lay thine ear close to the ground , and list if thou canst hear the tread of travellers .

Have you any levers to lift me up again , being down ? 'Sblood ! I'll not bear mine own flesh so far afoot again for all the coin in thy father's exchequer . What a plague mean ye to colt me thus ?

Thou liest : thou art not colted ; thou art uncolted .

I prithee , good Prince Hal , help me to my horse , good king's son .

Out , you rogue ! shall I be your ostler ?

Go , hang thyself in thine own heir apparent garters ! If I be ta'en I'll peach for this . An I have not ballads made on you all , and sung to filthy tunes , let a cup of sack be my poison : when a jest is so forward , and afoot too ! I hate it .


Stand .

So I do , against my will .

O ! 'tis our setter : I know his voice .


What news ?

Case ye , case ye ; on with your vizards : there's money of the king's coming down the hill ; 'tis going to the king's exchequer .

You lie , you rogue ; 'tis going to the king's tavern .

There's enough to make us all .

To be hanged .

Sirs , you four shall front them in the narrow lane ; Ned Poins and I will walk lower : if they 'scape from your encounter then they light on us .

How many be there of them ?

Some eight or ten .

'Zounds ! will they not rob us ?

What ! a coward , Sir John Paunch ?

Indeed , I am not John of Gaunt , your grandfather ; but yet no coward , Hal .

Well , we leave that to the proof .

Sirrah Jack , thy horse stands behind the hedge : when thou needst him there thou shalt find him . Farewell , and stand fast .

Now cannot I strike him if I should be hanged .

Ned , where are our disguises ?

Here , hard by ; stand close .


Now my masters , happy man be his dole , say I : every man to his business .


Come , neighbour ; the boy shall lead our horses down the hill ; we'll walk afoot awhile , and ease our legs .

Stand !

Jesu bless us !

Strike ; down with them ; cut the villains' throats : ah ! whoreson caterpillars ! bacon-fed knaves ! they hate us youth : down with them ; fleece them .

O ! we are undone , both we and ours for ever .

Hang ye , gorbellied knaves , are ye undone ? No , ye fat chuffs ; I would your store were here ! On , bacons , on ! What ! ye knaves , young men must live . You are grand-jurors are ye ? We'll jure ye , i' faith .

The thieves have bound the true men . Now could thou and I rob the thieves and go merrily to London , it would be argument for a week , laughter for a month , and a good jest for ever .

Stand close ; I hear them coming .


Come , my masters ; let us share , and then to horse before day . An the Prince and Poins be not two arrant cowards , there's no equity stirring : there's no more valour in that Poins than in a wild duck .

Your money !

Villains !


Got with much ease . Now merrily to horse :
The thieves are scatter'd and possess'd with fear 
So strongly that they dare not meet each other ;
Each takes his fellow for an officer .
Away , good Ned . Falstaff sweats to death 
And lards the lean earth as he walks along :
Were't not for laughing I should pity him .

How the rogue roar'd !


But for mine own part , my lord , I could be well contented to be there , in respect of the love I bear your house .

He could be contented ; why is he not then ? In respect of the love he bears our house : he shows in this he loves his own barn better than he loves our house . Let me see some more .

The purpose you undertake is dangerous ;

Why , that's certain : 'tis dangerous to take a cold , to sleep , to drink ; but I tell you , my lord fool , out of this nettle , danger , we pluck this flower , safety .

The purpose you undertake is dangerous ; the friends you have named uncertain ; the time itself unsorted ; and your whole plot too light for the counterpoise of so great an opposition .

Say you so , say you so ? I say unto you again , you are a shallow cowardly hind , and you lie . What a lack-brain is this ! By the Lord , our plot is a good plot as ever was laid ; our friends true and constant : a good plot , good friends , and full of expectation ; an excellent plot , very good friends . What a frosty-spirited rogue is this ! Why , my Lord of York commends the plot and the general course of the action . 'Zounds ! an I were now by this rascal , I could brain him with his lady's fan . Is there not my father , my uncle , and myself ? Lord Edmund Mortimer , my Lord of York , and Owen Glendower ? Is there not besides the Douglas ? Have I not all their letters to meet me in arms by the ninth of the next month , and are they not some of them set forward already ? What a pagan rascal is this ! an infidel ! Ha ! you shall see now in very sincerity of fear and cold heart , will he to the king and lay open all our proceedings . O ! I could divide myself and go to buffets , for moving such a dish of skim milk with so honourable an action . Hang him ! let him tell the king ; we are prepared . I will set forward to-night .

How now , Kate ! I must leave you within these two hours .

O , my good lord ! why are you thus alone ?
For what offence have I this fortnight been 
A banish'd woman from my Harry's bed ?
Tell me , sweet lord , what is't that takes from thee 
Thy stomach , pleasure , and thy golden sleep ?
Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth ,
And start so often when thou sitt'st alone ?
Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks ,
And given my treasures and my rights of thee 
To thick-eyed musing and curst melancholy ?
In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watch'd ,
And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars ,
Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed ,
Cry , 'Courage ! to the field !' And thou hast talk'd 
Of sallies and retires , of trenches , tents ,
Of palisadoes , frontiers , parapets ,
Of basilisks , of cannon , culverin ,
Of prisoners' ransom , and of soldiers slain ,
And all the currents of a heady fight .
Thy spirit within thee hath been so at war ,
And thus hath so bestirr'd thee in thy sleep ,
That beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow ,
Like bubbles in a late-disturbed stream ;
And in thy face strange motions have appear'd ,
Such as we see when men restrain their breath 
On some great sudden hest . O ! what portents are these ?
Some heavy business hath my lord in hand ,
And I must know it , else he loves me not .

What , ho !

Is Gilliams with the packet gone ?

He is , my lord , an hour ago .

Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff ?

One horse , my lord , he brought even now .

What horse ? a roan , a crop-ear , is it not ?

It is , my lord .

That roan shall be my throne .
Well , I will back him straight : O , Esperance !
Bid Butler lead him forth into the park .


But hear you , my lord .

What sayst thou , my lady ?

What is it carries you away ?

Why , my horse , my love , my horse .

Out , you mad-headed ape !
A weasel hath not such a deal of spleen 
As you are toss'd with . In faith ,
I'll know your business , Harry , that I will .
I fear my brother Mortimer doth stir 
About his title , and hath sent for you 
To line his enterprise . But if you go 

So far afoot , I shall be weary , love .

Come , come , you paraquito , answer me 
Directly unto this question that I ask .
In faith , I'll break thy little finger , Harry ,
An if thou wilt not tell me all things true .

Away ,
Away , you trifler ! Love ! I love thee not ,
I care not for thee , Kate : this is no world 
To play with mammets and to tilt with lips :
We must have bloody noses and crack'd crowns ,
And pass them current too . God's me , my horse !
What sayst thou , Kate ? what wouldst thou have with me ?

Do you not love me ? do you not , indeed ?
Well , do not , then ; for since you love me not ,
I will not love myself . Do you not love me ?
Nay , tell me if you speak in jest or no .

Come , wilt thou see me ride ?
And when I am o' horseback , I will swear 
I love thee infinitely . But hark you , Kate ;
I must not have you henceforth question me 
Whither I go , nor reason whereabout .
Whither I must , I must ; and , to conclude ,
This evening must I leave you , gentle Kate .
I know you wise ; but yet no further wise 
Than Harry Percy's wife : constant you are ,
But yet a woman : and for secrecy ,
No lady closer ; for I well believe 
Thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know ;
And so far will I trust thee , gentle Kate .

How ! so far ?

Not an inch further . But , hark you , Kate ;
Whither I go , thither shall you go too ;
To-day will I set forth , to-morrow you .
Will this content you , Kate ?

It must , of force .


Ned , prithee , come out of that fat room , and lend me thy hand to laugh a little .

Where hast been , Hal ?

With three or four loggerheads amongst three or four score hogsheads . I have sounded the very base string of humility . Sirrah , I am sworn brother to a leash of drawers , and can call them all by their christen names , as Tom , Dick , and Francis . They take it already upon their salvation , that though I be but Prince of Wales , yet I am the king of courtesy ; and tell me flatly I am no proud Jack , like Falstaff , but a Corinthian , a lad of mettle , a good boy ,by the Lord , so they call me ,and when I am king of England , I shall command all the good lads in Eastcheap . They call drinking deep , dyeing scarlet ; and when you breathe in your watering , they cry 'hem !' and bid you play it off . To conclude , I am so good a proficient in one quarter of an hour , that I can drink with any tinker in his own language during my life . I tell thee , Ned , thou hast lost much honour that thou wert not with me in this action . But , sweet Ned ,to sweeten which name of Ned , I give thee this pennyworth of sugar , clapped even now into my hand by an underskinker , one that never spake other English in his life than 'Eight shillings and sixpence ,' and 'You are welcome ,' with this shrill addition ,'Anon , anon , sir ! Score a pint of bastard in the Half-moon ,' or so . But , Ned , to drive away the time till Falstaff come , I prithee do thou stand in some by-room , while I question my puny drawer to what end he gave me the sugar ; and do thou never leave calling 'Francis !' that his tale to me may be nothing but 'Anon .' Step aside , and I'll show thee a precedent .

Francis !

Thou art perfect .

Francis !

Anon , anon , sir . Look down into the Pomgarnet , Ralph .

Come hither , Francis .

My lord .

How long hast thou to serve , Francis ?

Forsooth , five years , and as much as to 

Francis !

Anon , anon , sir .

Five years ! by'r lady a long lease for the clinking of pewter . But , Francis , darest thou be so valiant as to play the coward with thy indenture and show it a fair pair of heels and run from it ?

O Lord , sir ! I'll be sworn upon all the books in England , I could find in my heart 

Francis !

Anon , sir .

How old art thou , Francis ?

Let me see about Michaelmas next I shall be 

Francis !

Anon , sir . Pray you , stay a little , my lord .

Nay , but hark you , Francis . For the sugar thou gavest me , 'twas a pennyworth , was't not ?

O Lord , sir ! I would it had been two .

I will give thee for it a thousand pound : ask me when thou wilt and thou shalt have it .

Francis !

Anon , anon .

Anon , Francis ? No , Francis ; but to-morrow , Francis ; or , Francis , o' Thursday ; or , indeed , Francis , when thou wilt . But , Francis !

My lord ?

Wilt thou rob this leathern-jerkin , crystal-button , knot-pated , agate-ring , pukestocking , caddis-garter , smooth-tongue , Spanish-pouch ,

O Lord , sir , who do you mean ?

Why then , your brown bastard is your only drink ; for , look you , Francis , your white canvas doublet will sully . In Barbary , sir , it cannot come to so much .

What , sir ?

Francis !

Away , you rogue ! Dost thou not hear them call ?

What ! standest thou still , and hearest such a calling ? Look to the guests within .

My lord , old Sir John , with half a dozen more , are at the door : shall I let them in ?

Let them alone awhile , and then open the door .

Poins !


Anon , anon , sir .

Sirrah , Falstaff and the rest of the thieves are at the door : shall we be merry ?

As merry as crickets , my lad . But hark ye ; what cunning match have you made with this jest of the drawer ? come , what's the issue ?

I am now of all humours that have show'd themselves humours since the old days of goodman Adam to the pupil age of this present twelve o'clock at midnight .

What's o'clock , Francis ?

Anon , anon , sir .


That ever this fellow should have fewer words than a parrot , and yet the son of a woman ! His industry is up-stairs and down-stairs ; his eloquence the parcel of a reckoning . I am not yet of Percy's mind , the Hotspur of the North ; he that kills me some six or seven dozen of Scots at a breakfast , washes his hands , and says to his wife , 'Fie upon this quiet life ! I want work .' 'O my sweet Harry ,' says she , 'how many hast thou killed to-day ?' 'Give my roan horse a drench ,' says he , and answers , 'Some fourteen ,' an hour after , 'a trifle , a trifle .' I prithee call in Falstaff : I'll play Percy , and that damned brawn shall play Dame Mortimer his wife . 'Rivo !' says the drunkard . Call in ribs , call in tallow .


Welcome , Jack : where hast thou been ?

A plague of all cowards , I say , and a vengeance too ! marry , and amen ! Give me a cup of sack , boy . Ere I lead this life long , I'll sew nether-stocks and mend them and foot them too . A plague of all cowards ! Give me a cup of sack , rogue .Is there no virtue extant ?


Didst thou never see Titan kiss a dish of butter pitiful-hearted Titan , that melted at the sweet tale of the sun ? if thou didst then behold that compound .

You rogue , here's lime in this sack too : there is nothing but roguery to be found in villanous man : yet a coward is worse than a cup of sack with lime in it , a villanous coward ! Go thy ways , old Jack ; die when thou wilt . If manhood , good manhood , be not forgot upon the face of the earth , then am I a shotten herring . There live not three good men unhanged in England , and one of them is fat and grows old : God help the while ! a bad world , I say . I would I were a weaver ; I could sing psalms or anything . A plague of all cowards , I say still .

How now , wool-sack ! what mutter you ?

A king's son ! If I do not beat thee out of thy kingdom with a dagger of lath , and drive all thy subjects afore thee like a flock of wild geese , I'll never wear hair on my face more . You Prince of Wales !

Why , you whoreson round man , what's the matter ?

Are you not a coward ? answer me to that ; and Poins there ?

'Zounds ! ye fat paunch , an ye call me coward , I'll stab thee .

I call thee coward ! I'll see thee damned ere I call thee coward ; but I would give a thousand pound I could run as fast as thou canst . You are straight enough in the shoulders ; you care not who sees your back : call you that backing of your friends ? A plague upon such backing ! give me them that will face me . Give me a cup of sack : I am a rogue if I drunk to-day .

O villain ! thy lips are scarce wiped since thou drunkest last .

All's one for that .

A plague of all cowards , still say I .

What's the matter ?

What's the matter ? there be four of us here have ta'en a thousand pound this day morning .

Where is it , Jack ? where is it ?

Where is it ! taken from us it is : a hundred upon poor four of us .

What , a hundred , man ?

I am a rogue , if I were not at half-sword with a dozen of them two hours together . I have 'scap'd by miracle . I am eight times thrust through the doublet , four through the hose ; my buckler out through and through ; my sword hacked like a hand-saw : ecce signum ! I never dealt better since I was a man : all would not do . A plague of all cowards ! Let them speak : if they speak more or less than truth , they are villains and the sons of darkness .

Speak , sirs ; how was it ?

We four set upon some dozen ,

Sixteen , at least , my lord .

And bound them .

No , no , they were not bound .

You rogue , they were bound , every man of them ; or I am a Jew else , an Ebrew Jew .

As we were sharing , some six or seven fresh men set upon us ,

And unbound the rest , and then come in the other .

What , fought ye with them all ?

All ! I know not what ye call all ; but if I fought not with fifty of them , I am a bunch of radish : if there were not two or three and fifty upon poor old Jack , then am I no two-legged creature .

Pray God you have not murdered some of them .

Nay , that's past praying for : I have peppered two of them : two I am sure I have paid , two rogues in buckram suits . I tell thee what , Hal , if I tell thee a lie , spit in my face , call me horse . Thou knowest my old ward ; here I lay , and thus I bore my point . Four rogues in buckram let drive at me ,

What , four ? thou saidst but two even now .

Four , Hal ; I told thee four .

Ay , ay , he said four .

These four came all a-front , and mainly thrust at me . I made me no more ado but took all their seven points in my target , thus .

Seven ? why , there were but four even now .

In buckram .

Ay , four , in buckram suits .

Seven , by these hilts , or I am a villain else .

Prithee , let him alone ; we shall have more anon .

Dost thou hear me , Hal ?

Ay , and mark thee too , Jack .

Do so , for it is worth the listening to .
These nine in buckram that I told thee of ,

So , two more already .

Their points being broken ,

Down fell their hose .

Began to give me ground ; but I followed me close , came in foot and hand and with a thought seven of the eleven I paid .

O monstrous ! eleven buckram men grown out of two .

But , as the devil would have it , three misbegotten knaves in Kendal-green came at my back and let drive at me ; for it was so dark , Hal , that thou couldst not see thy hand .

These lies are like the father that begets them ; gross as a mountain , open , palpable . Why , thou clay-brained guts , thou knotty-pated fool , thou whoreson , obscene , greasy tallowketch ,

What , art thou mad ? art thou mad ? is not the truth the truth ?

Why , how couldst thou know these men in Kendal-green , when it was so dark thou couldst not see thy hand ? come , tell us your reason : what sayest thou to this ?

Come , your reason , Jack , your reason .

What , upon compulsion ? 'Zounds ! an I were at the strappado , or all the racks in the world , I would not tell you on compulsion . Give you a reason on compulsion ! If reasons were as plenty as blackberries I would give no man a reason upon compulsion , I .

I'll be no longer guilty of this sin : this sanguine coward , this bed-presser , this horseback-breaker , this huge hill of flesh ;

'Sblood , you starveling , you elf-skin , you dried neat's-tongue , you bull's pizzle , you stock-fish ! O ! for breath to utter what is like thee ; you tailor's yard , you sheath , you bow-case , you vile standing-tuck ;

Well , breathe awhile , and then to it again ; and when thou hast tired thyself in base comparisons , hear me speak but this .

Mark , Jack .

We two saw you four set on four and you bound them , and were masters of their wealth . Mark now , how a plain tale shall put you down . Then did we two set on you four , and , with a word , out-faced you from your prize , and have it ; yea , and can show it you here in the house . And , Falstaff , you carried your guts away as nimbly , with as quick dexterity , and roared for mercy , and still ran and roared , as ever I heard bull-calf . What a slave art thou , to hack thy sword as thou hast done , and then say it was in fight ! What trick , what device , what starting-hole canst thou now find out to hide thee from this open and apparent shame ?

Come , let's hear , Jack ; what trick hast thou now ?

By the Lord , I knew ye as well as he that made ye . Why , hear you , my masters : was it for me to kill the heir-apparent ? Should I turn upon the true prince ? Why , thou knowest I am as valiant as Hercules ; but beware instinct ; the lion will not touch the true prince . Instinct is a great matter , I was a coward on instinct . I shall think the better of myself and thee during my life ; I for a valiant lion , and thou for a true prince . But , by the Lord , lads , I am glad you have the money . Hostess , clap to the doors : watch to-night , pray to-morrow . Gallants , lads , boys , hearts of gold , all the titles of good fellowship come to you ! What ! shall we be merry ? shall we have a play extempore ?

Content ; and the argument shall be thy running away .

Ah ! no more of that , Hal , an thou lovest me !


O Jesu ! my lord the prince !

How now , my lady the hostess ! what sayest thou to me ?

Marry , my lord , there is a nobleman of the court at door would speak with you : he says he comes from your father .

Give him as much as will make him a royal man , and send him back again to my mother .

What manner of man is he ?

An old man .

What doth gravity out of his bed at midnight ? Shall I give him his answer ?

Prithee , do , Jack .

Faith , and I'll send him packing .


Now , sirs : by'r lady , you fought fair ; so did you , Peto ; so did you , Bardolph : you are lions too , you ran away upon instinct , you will not touch the true prince ; no , fie !

Faith , I ran when I saw others run .

Faith , tell me now in earnest , how came Falstaff's sword so hacked ?

Why he hacked it with his dagger , and said he would swear truth out of England but he would make you believe it was done in fight , and persuaded us to do the like .

Yea , and to tickle our noses with spear-grass to make them bleed , and then to beslubber our garments with it and swear it was the blood of true men . I did that I did not this seven year before ; I blushed to hear his monstrous devices .

O villain ! thou stolest a cup of sack eighteen years ago , and wert taken with the manner , and ever since thou hast blushed extempore . Thou hadst fire and sword on thy side , and yet thou rannest away . What instinct hadst thou for it ?

My lord , do you see these meteors ? do you behold these exhalations ?

I do .

What think you they portend ?

Hot livers and cold purses .

Choler , my lord , if rightly taken .

No , if rightly taken , halter .

Here comes lean Jack , here comes bare-bone .How now , my sweet creature of bombast ! How long is't ago , Jack , since thou sawest thine own knee ?

My own knee ! when I was about thy years , Hal , I was not an eagle's talon in the waist ; I could have crept into any alderman's thumb-ring . A plague of sighing and grief ! it blows a man up like a bladder . There's villanous news abroad : here was Sir John Bracy from your father : you must to the court in the morning . That same mad fellow of the north , Percy , and he of Wales , that gave Amaimon the bastinado and made Lucifer cuckold , and swore the devil his true liegeman upon the cross of a Welsh hook what a plague call you him ?

Owen Glendower .

Owen , Owen , the same ; and his son-in-law Mortimer and old Northumberland ; and that sprightly Scot of Scots , Douglas , that runs o' horseback up a hill perpendicular .

He that rides at high speed and with his pistol kills a sparrow flying .

You have hit it .

So did he never the sparrow .

Well , that rascal hath good mettle in him ; he will not run .

Why , what a rascal art thou then to praise him so for running !

O' horseback , ye cuckoo ! but , afoot he will not budge a foot .

Yes , Jack , upon instinct .

I grant ye , upon instinct . Well , he is there too , and one Mordake , and a thousand blue-caps more . Worcester is stolen away to-night ; thy father's beard is turned white with the news : you may buy land now as cheap as stinking mackerel .

Why then , it is like , if there come a hot June and this civil buffeting hold , we shall buy maidenheads as they buy hob-nails , by the hundreds .

By the mass , lad , thou sayest true ; it is like we shall have good trading that way . But tell me , Hal , art thou not horribly afeard ? thou being heir apparent , could the world pick thee out three such enemies again as that fiend Douglas , that spirit Percy , and that devil Glendower ? Art thou not horribly afraid ? doth not thy blood thrill at it ?

Not a whit , i' faith ; I lack some of thy instinct .

Well , thou wilt be horribly chid to-morrow when thou comest to thy father : if thou love me , practise an answer .

Do thou stand for my father , and examine me upon the particulars of my life .

Shall I ? content : this chair shall be my state , this dagger my sceptre , and this cushion my crown .

Thy state is taken for a joint-stool , thy golden sceptre for a leaden dagger , and thy precious rich crown for a pitiful bald crown !

Well , an the fire of grace be not quite out of thee , now shalt thou be moved . Give me a cup of sack to make mine eyes look red , that it may be thought I have wept ; for I must speak in passion , and I will do it in King Cambyses' vein .


Well , here is my leg .


And here is my speech . Stand aside , nobility .

O Jesu ! This is excellent sport , i' faith !

Weep not , sweet queen , for trickling tears are vain .

O , the father ! how he holds his countenance .

For God's sake , lords , convey my tristful queen ,
For tears do stop the flood-gates of her eyes .

O Jesu ! he doth it as like one of these harlotry players as ever I see !

Peace , good pint-pot ! peace , good tickle-brain ! Harry , I do not only marvel where thou spendest thy time , but also how thou art accompanied : for though the camomile , the more it is trodden on the faster it grows , yet youth , the more it is wasted the sooner it wears . That thou art my son , I have partly thy mother's word , partly my own opinion ; but chiefly , a villanous trick of thine eye and a foolish hanging of thy nether lip , that doth warrant me . If then thou be son to me , here lies the point ; why , being son to me , art thou so pointed at ? Shall the blessed sun of heaven prove a micher and eat blackberries ? a question not to be asked . Shall the son of England prove a thief and take purses ? a question to be asked . There is a thing , Harry , which thou hast often heard of , and it is known to many in our land by the name of pitch : this pitch , as ancient writers do report , doth defile ; so doth the company thou keepest ; for , Harry , now I do not speak to thee in drink , but in tears , not in pleasure but in passion , not in words only , but in woes also . And yet there is a virtuous man whom I have often noted in thy company , but I know not his name .

What manner of man , an it like your majesty ?

A goodly portly man , i' faith , and a corpulent ; of a cheerful look , a pleasing eye , and a most noble carriage ; and , as I think , his age some fifty , or by'r lady , inclining to threescore ; and now I remember me , his name is Falstaff : if that man should be lewdly given , he deceiveth me ; for , Harry , I see virtue in his looks . If then the tree may be known by the fruit , as the fruit by the tree , then , peremptorily I speak it , there is virtue in that Falstaff : him keep with , the rest banish . And tell me now , thou naughty varlet , tell me , where hast thou been this month ?

Dost thou speak like a king ? Do thou stand for me , and I'll play my father .

Depose me ? if thou dost it half so gravely , so majestically , both in word and matter , hang me up by the heels for a rabbit-sucker or a poulter's hare .

Well , here I am set .

And here I stand . Judge , my masters .

Now , Harry ! whence come you ?

My noble lord , from Eastcheap .

The complaints I hear of thee are grievous .

'Sblood , my lord , they are false : nay ,
I'll tickle ye for a young prince , i' faith .

Swearest thou , ungracious boy ? henceforth ne'er look on me . Thou art violently carried away from grace : there is a devil haunts thee in the likeness of a fat old man ; a tun of man is thy companion . Why dost thou converse with that trunk of humours , that bolting-hutch of beastliness , that swoln parcel of dropsies , that huge bombard of sack , that stuffed cloak-bag of guts , that roasted Manningtree ox with the pudding in his belly , that reverend vice , that grey iniquity , that father ruffian , that vanity in years ? Wherein is he good but to taste sack and drink it ? wherein neat and cleanly but to carve a capon and eat it ? wherein cunning but in craft ? wherein crafty but in villany ? wherein villanous but in all things ? wherein worthy but in nothing ?

I would your Grace would take me with you : whom means your Grace ?

That villanous abominable misleader of youth , Falstaff , that old white-bearded Satan .

My lord , the man I know .

I know thou dost .

But to say I know more harm in him than in myself were to say more than I know . That he is old , the more the pity , his white hairs do witness it ; but that he is , saving your reverence , a whoremaster , that I utterly deny . If sack and sugar be a fault , God help the wicked ! If to be old and merry be a sin , then many an old host that I know is damned : if to be fat be to be hated , then Pharaoh's lean kine are to be loved . No , my good lord ; banish Peto , banish Bardolph , banish Poins ; but for sweet Jack Falstaff , kind Jack Falstaff , true Jack Falstaff , valiant Jack Falstaff , and therefore more valiant , being , as he is , old Jack Falstaff , banish not him thy Harry's company : banish not him thy Harry's company : banish plump Jack , and banish all the world .

I do , I will .


O ! my lord , my lord , the sheriff with a most monstrous watch is at the door .

Out , ye rogue ! Play out the play : I have much to say in the behalf of that Falstaff .


O Jesu ! my lord , my lord !

Heigh , heigh ! the devil rides upon a fiddle-stick : what's the matter ?

The sheriff and all the watch are at the door : they are come to search the house . Shall I let them in ?

Dost thou hear , Hal ? never call a true piece of gold a counterfeit : thou art essentially mad without seeming so .

And thou a natural coward without instinct .

I deny your major . If you will deny the sheriff , so ; if not , let him enter : if I become not a cart as well as another man , a plague on my bringing up ! I hope I shall as soon be strangled with a halter as another .

Go , hide thee behind the arras : the rest walk up above . Now , my masters , for a true face and good conscience .

Both which I have had ; but their date is out , and therefore I'll hide me .


Call in the sheriff .

Now , master sheriff , what's your will with me ?

First , pardon me , my lord . A hue and cry 
Hath follow'd certain men unto this house .

What men ?

One of them is well known , my gracious lord ,
A gross fat man .

As fat as butter .

The man , I do assure you , is not here ,
For I myself at this time have employ'd him .
And , sheriff , I will engage my word to thee ,
That I will , by to-morrow dinner-time ,
Send him to answer thee , or any man ,
For anything he shall be charg'd withal :
And so let me entreat you leave the house .

I will , my lord . There are two gentlemen 
Have in this robbery lost three hundred marks .

It may be so : if he have robb'd these men ,
He shall be answerable ; and so farewell .

Good night , my noble lord .

I think it is good morrow , is it not ?

Indeed , my lord , I think it be two o'clock .


This oily rascal is known as well as Paul's .
Go , call him forth .

Falstaff ! fast asleep behind the arras , and snorting like a horse .

Hark , how hard he fetches breath .
Search his pockets .

What hast thou found ?

Nothing but papers , my lord .

Let's see what they be : read them .


O monstrous ! but one half-pennyworth of bread to this intolerable deal of sack ! What there is else , keep close ; we'll read it at more advantage . There let him sleep till day . I'll to the court in the morning . We must all to the wars , and thy place shall be honourable . I'll procure this fat rogue a charge of foot ; and , I know , his death will be a march of twelve-score . The money shall be paid back again with advantage . Be with me betimes in the morning ; and so good morrow , Peto .

Good morrow , good my lord .

These promises are fair , the parties sure ,
And our induction full of prosperous hope .

Lord Mortimer , and cousin Glendower ,
Will you sit down ?
And uncle Worcester : a plague upon it !
I have forgot the map .

No , here it is .
Sit , cousin Percy ; sit , good cousin Hotspur ;
For by that name as oft as Lancaster 
Doth speak of you , his cheek looks pale and with 
A rising sigh he wishes you in heaven .

And you in hell , as often as he hears 
Owen Glendower spoke of .

I cannot blame him : at my nativity 
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes ,
Of burning cressets ; and at my birth 
The frame and huge foundation of the earth 
Shak'd like a coward .

Why , so it would have done at the same season , if your mother's cat had but kittened , though yourself had never been born .

I say the earth did shake when I was born .

And I say the earth was not of my mind ,
If you suppose as fearing you it shook .

The heavens were all on fire , the earth did tremble .

O ! then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire ,
And not in fear of your nativity .
Diseased nature oftentimes breaks forth 
In strange eruptions ; oft the teeming earth 
Is with a kind of colic pinch'd and vex'd 
By the imprisoning of unruly wind 
Within her womb ; which , for enlargement striving ,
Shakes the old beldam earth , and topples down 
Steeples and moss-grown towers . At your birth 
Our grandam earth , having this distemperature ,
In passion shook .

Cousin , of many men 
I do not bear these crossings . Give me leave 
To tell you once again that at my birth 
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes ,
The goats ran from the mountains , and the herds 
Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields .
These signs have mark'd me extraordinary ;
And all the courses of my life do show 
I am not in the roll of common men .
Where is he living , clipp'd in with the sea 
That chides the banks of England , Scotland , Wales ,
Which calls me pupil , or hath read to me ?
And bring him out that is but woman's son 
Can trace me in the tedious ways of art 
And hold me pace in deep experiments .

I think there's no man speaks better Welsh .
I'll to dinner .

Peace , cousin Percy ! you will make him mad .

I can call spirits from the vasty deep .

Why , so can I , or so can any man ;
But will they come when you do call for them ?

Why , I can teach thee , cousin , to command 
The devil .

And I can teach thee , coz , to shame the devil 
By telling truth : tell truth and shame the devil .
If thou have power to raise him , bring him hither ,
And I'll be sworn I have power to shame him hence .
O ! while you live , tell truth and shame the devil !

Come , come ;
No more of this unprofitable chat .

Three times hath Henry Bolingbroke made head 
Against my power ; thrice from the banks of Wye 
And sandy-bottom'd Severn have I sent him 
Bootless home and weather-beaten back .

Home without boots , and in foul weather too !
How 'scapes he agues , in the devil's name ?

Come , here's the map : shall we divide our right 
According to our threefold order ta'en ?

The archdeacon hath divided it 
Into three limits very equally .
England , from Trent and Severn hitherto ,
By south and east , is to my part assign'd :
All westward , Wales beyond the Severn shore ,
And all the fertile land within that bound ,
To Owen Glendower : and , dear coz , to you 
The remnant northward , lying off from Trent .
And our indentures tripartite are drawn ,
Which being sealed interchangeably ,
A business that this night may execute ,
To-morrow , cousin Percy , you and I 
And my good Lord of Worcester will set forth 
To meet your father and the Scottish power ,
As is appointed us , at Shrewsbury .
My father Glendower is not ready yet ,
Nor shall we need his help these fourteen days .


Within that space you may have drawn together 
Your tenants , friends , and neighbouring gentlemen .

A shorter time shall send me to you , lords ;
And in my conduct shall your ladies come ,
From whom you now must steal and take no leave ;
For there will be a world of water shed 
Upon the parting of your wives and you .

Methinks my moiety , north from Burton here ,
In quantity equals not one of yours :
See how this river comes me cranking in ,
And cuts me from the best of all my land 
A huge half-moon , a monstrous cantle out .
I'll have the current in this place damm'd up ,
And here the smug and silver Trent shall run 
In a new channel , fair and evenly :
It shall not wind with such a deep indent ,
To rob me of so rich a bottom here .

Not wind ! it shall , it must ; you see it doth .

Yea , but 
Mark how he bears his course , and runs me up 
With like advantage on the other side ;
Gelding the opposed continent as much ,
As on the other side it takes from you .

Yea , but a little charge will trench him here ,
And on this north side win this cape of land ;
And then he runs straight and even .

I'll have it so ; a little charge will do it .

I will not have it alter'd .

Will not you ?

No , nor you shall not .

Who shall say me nay ?

Why , that will I .

Let me not understand you then :
Speak it in Welsh .

I can speak English , lord , as well as you ,
For I was train'd up in the English court ;
Where , being but young , I framed to the harp 
Many an English ditty lovely well ,
And gave the tongue an helpful ornament ;
A virtue that was never seen in you .

Marry , and I'm glad of it with all my heart .
I had rather be a kitten , and cry mew 
Than one of these same metre ballad-mongers ;
I had rather hear a brazen canstick turn'd ,
Or a dry wheel grate on the axle-tree ;
And that would set my teeth nothing on edge ,
Nothing so much as mincing poetry :
'Tis like the forc'd gait of a shuffling nag .

Come , you shall have Trent turn'd .

I do not care : I'll give thrice so much land 
To any well-deserving friend ;
But in the way of bargain , mark you me ,
I'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair .
Are the indentures drawn ? shall we be gone ?

The moon shines fair , you may away by night :
I'll haste the writer and withal 
Break with your wives of your departure hence :
I am afraid my daughter will run mad ,
So much she doteth on her Mortimer .


Fie , cousin Percy ! how you cross my father !

I cannot choose : sometimes he angers me 
With telling me of the moldwarp and the ant ,
Of the dreamer Merlin and his prophecies ,
And of a dragon , and a finless fish ,
A clip-wing'd griffin , and a moulten raven ,
A couching lion , and a ramping cat ,
And such a deal of skimble-skamble stuff 
As puts me from my faith . I'll tell thee what ;
He held me last night at least nine hours 
In reckoning up the several devils' names 
That were his lackeys : I cried 'hum !' and 'well , go to .' 
But mark'd him not a word . O ! he's as tedious 
As a tired horse , a railing wife ;
Worse than a smoky house . I had rather live 
With cheese and garlick in a windmill , far ,
Than feed on cates and have him talk to me 
In any summer-house in Christendom .

In faith , he is a worthy gentleman ,
Exceedingly well read , and profited 
In strange concealments , valiant as a lion 
And wondrous affable , and as bountiful 
As mines of India . Shall I tell you , cousin ?
He holds your temper in a high respect ,
And curbs himself even of his natural scope 
When you do cross his humour ; faith , he does .
I warrant you , that man is not alive 
Might so have tempted him as you have done ,
Without the taste of danger and reproof :
But do not use it oft , let me entreat you .

In faith , my lord , you are too wilfulblame ;
And since your coming hither have done enough 
To put him quite beside his patience .
You must needs learn , lord , to amend this fault :
Though sometimes it show greatness , courage , blood ,
And that's the dearest grace it renders you ,
Yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage ,
Defect of manners , want of government ,
Pride , haughtiness , opinion , and disdain :
The least of which haunting a nobleman 
Loseth men's hearts and leaves behind a stain 
Upon the beauty of all parts besides ,
Beguiling them of commendation .

Well , I am school'd ; good manners be your speed !
Here come our wives , and let us take our leave .


This is the deadly spite that angers me ,
My wife can speak no English , I no Welsh .

My daughter weeps ; she will not part with you :
She'll be a soldier too : she'll to the wars .

Good father , tell her that she and my aunt Percy ,
Shall follow in your conduct speedily .


She's desperate here ; a peevish self-will'd harlotry , one that no persuasion can do good upon .


I understand thy looks : that pretty Welsh 
Which thou pour'st down from these swelling heavens 
I am too perfect in ; and , but for shame ,
In such a parley would I answer thee .

I understand thy kisses and thou mine ,
And that's a feeling disputation :
But I will never be a truant , love ,
Till I have learn'd thy language ; for thy tongue 
Makes Welsh as sweet as ditties highly penn'd ,
Sung by a fair queen in a summer's bower ,
With ravishing division , to her lute .

Nay , if you melt , then will she run mad .


O ! I am ignorance itself in this .

She bids you 
Upon the wanton rushes lay you down 
And rest your gentle head upon her lap ,
And she will sing the song that pleaseth you ,
And on your eye-lids crown the god of sleep ,
Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness ,
Making such difference 'twixt wake and sleep 
As is the difference between day and night 
The hour before the heavenly-harness'd team 
Begins his golden progress in the east .

With all my heart I'll sit and hear her sing :
By that time will our book , I think , be drawn .

Do so ;
And those musicians that shall play to you 
Hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence ,
And straight they shall be here : sit , and attend .

Come , Kate , thou art perfect in lying down : come , quick , quick , that I may lay my head in thy lap .

Go , ye giddy goose .


Now I perceive the devil understands Welsh ;
And 'tis no marvel he is so humorous .
By'r lady , he's a good musician .

Then should you be nothing but musical for you are altogether governed by humours . Lie still , ye thief , and hear the lady sing in Welsh .

I had rather hear Lady , my brach , how ! in Irish .

Wouldst thou have thy head broken ?

No .

Then be still .

Neither ; 'tis a woman's fault .

Now , God help thee !

To the Welsh lady's bed .

What's that ?

Peace ! she sings .


Come , Kate , I'll have your song too .

Not mine , in good sooth .

Not yours , 'in good sooth !' Heart ! you swear like a comfit-maker's wife ! Not you , 'in good sooth ;' and , 'as true as I live ;' and , 'as God shall mend me ;' and , 'as sure as day :' 
And giv'st such sarcenet surety for thy oaths ,
As if thou never walk'dst further than Finsbury .
Swear me , Kate , like a lady as thou art ,
A good mouth-filling oath ; and leave 'in sooth ,' 
And such protest of pepper-gingerbread ,
To velvet-guards and Sunday-citizens .
Come , sing .

I will not sing .

'Tis the next way to turn tailor or be red-breast teacher . An the indentures be drawn , I'll away within these two hours ; and so , come in when ye will .


Come , come , Lord Mortimer ; you are as slow 
As hot Lord Percy is on fire to go .
By this our book is drawn ; we will but seal ,
And then to horse immediately .

With all my heart .


Lords , give us leave ; the Prince of Wales and I 
Must have some private conference : but be near at hand ,
For we shall presently have need of you .

I know not whether God will have it so ,
For some displeasing service I have done ,
That , in his secret doom , out of my blood 
He'll breed revengement and a scourge for me ;
But thou dost in thy passages of life 
Make me believe that thou art only mark'd 
For the hot vengeance and the rod of heaven 
To punish my mistreadings . Tell me else ,
Could such inordinate and low desires ,
Such poor , such bare , such lewd , such mean attempts ,
Such barren pleasures , rude society ,
As thou art match'd withal and grafted to ,
Accompany the greatness of thy blood 
And hold their level with thy princely heart ?

So please your majesty , I would I could 
Quit all offences with as clear excuse 
As well as I am doubtless I can purge 
Myself of many I am charg'd withal :
Yet such extenuation let me beg ,
As , in reproof of many tales devis'd ,
Which oft the ear of greatness needs must hear ,
By smiling pick-thanks and base newsmongers ,
I may , for some things true , wherein my youth 
Hath faulty wander'd and irregular ,
Find pardon on my true submission .

God pardon thee ! yet let me wonder , Harry ,
At thy affections , which do hold a wing 
Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors .
Thy place in council thou hast rudely lost ,
Which by thy younger brother is supplied ,
And art almost an alien to the hearts 
Of all the court and princes of my blood .
The hope and expectation of thy time 
Is ruin'd , and the soul of every man 
Prophetically do forethink thy fall .
Had I so lavish of my presence been ,
So common-hackney'd in the eyes of men ,
So stale and cheap to vulgar company ,
Opinion , that did help me to the crown ,
Had still kept loyal to possession 
And left me in reputeless banishment ,
A fellow of no mark nor likelihood .
By being seldom seen , I could not stir ,
But like a comet I was wonder'd at ;
That men would tell their children , 'This is he ;' 
Others would say , 'Where ? which is Bolingbroke ?' 
And then I stole all courtesy from heaven ,
And dress'd myself in such humility 
That I did pluck allegiance from men's hearts ,
Loud shouts and salutations from their mouths ,
Even in the presence of the crowned king .
Thus did I keep my person fresh and new ;
My presence , like a robe pontifical ,
Ne'er seen but wonder'd at : and so my state ,
Seldom but sumptuous , showed like a feast ,
And won by rareness such solemnity .
The skipping king , he ambled up and down 
With shallow jesters and rash bavin wits ,
Soon kindled and soon burnt ; carded his state ,
Mingled his royalty with capering fools ,
Had his great name profaned with their scorns ,
And gave his countenance , against his name ,
To laugh at gibing boys and stand the push 
Of every beardless vain comparative ;
Grew a companion to the common streets ,
Enfeoff'd himself to popularity ;
That , being daily swallow'd by men's eyes ,
They surfeited with honey and began 
To loathe the taste of sweetness , whereof a little 
More than a little is by much too much .
So , when he had occasion to be seen ,
He was but as the cuckoo is in June ,
Heard , not regarded ; seen , but with such eyes 
As , sick and blunted with community ,
Afford no extraordinary gaze ,
Such as is bent on sun-like majesty 
When it shines seldom in admiring eyes ;
But rather drows'd and hung their eyelids down ,
Slept in his face , and render'd such aspect 
As cloudy men use to their adversaries ,
Being with his presence glutted , gorg'd , and full .
And in that very line , Harry , stand'st thou ;
For thou hast lost thy princely privilege 
With vile participation : not an eye 
But is aweary of thy common sight ,
Save mine , which hath desir'd to see thee more ;
Which now doth that I would not have it do ,
Make blind itself with foolish tenderness .

I shall hereafter , my thrice gracious lord ,
Be more myself .

For all the world ,
As thou art to this hour was Richard then 
When I from France set foot at Ravenspurgh ;
And even as I was then is Percy now .
Now , by my sceptre and my soul to boot ,
He hath more worthy interest to the state 
Than thou the shadow of succession ;
For of no right , nor colour like to right ,
He doth fill fields with harness in the realm ,
Turns head against the lion's armed jaws ,
And , being no more in debt to years than thou ,
Leads ancient lords and reverend bishops on 
To bloody battles and to bruising arms .
What never-dying honour hath he got 
Against renowned Douglas ! whose high deeds ,
Whose hot incursions and great name in arms ,
Holds from all soldiers chief majority ,
And military title capital ,
Through all the kingdoms that acknowledge Christ .
Thrice hath this Hotspur , Mars in swathling clothes ,
This infant warrior , in his enterprises 
Discomfited great Douglas ; ta'en him once ,
Enlarged him and made a friend of him ,
To fill the mouth of deep defiance up 
And shake the peace and safety of our throne .
And what say you to this ? Percy , Northumberland ,
The Archbishop's Grace of York , Douglas , Mortimer ,
Capitulate against us and are up .
But wherefore do I tell these news to thee ?
Why , Harry , do I tell thee of my foes ,
Which art my near'st and dearest enemy ?
Thou that art like enough , through vassal fear ,
Base inclination , and the start of spleen ,
To fight against me under Percy's pay ,
To dog his heels , and curtsy at his frowns ,
To show how much thou art degenerate .

Do not think so ; you shall not find it so :
And God forgive them , that so much have sway'd 
Your majesty's good thoughts away from me !
I will redeem all this on Percy's head ,
And in the closing of some glorious day 
Be bold to tell you that I am your son ;
When I will wear a garment all of blood 
And stain my favours in a bloody mask ,
Which , wash'd away , shall scour my shame with it :
And that shall be the day , whene'er it lights ,
That this same child of honour and renown ,
This gallant Hotspur , this all-praised knight ,
And your unthought of Harry chance to meet .
For every honour sitting on his helm ,
Would they were multitudes , and on my head 
My shames redoubled !for the time will come 
That I shall make this northern youth exchange 
His glorious deeds for my indignities .
Percy is but my factor , good my lord ,
To engross up glorious deeds on my behalf ;
And I will call him to so strict account 
That he shall render every glory up ,
Yea , even the slightest worship of his time ,
Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart .
This , in the name of God , I promise here :
The which , if he be pleas'd I shall perform ,
I do beseech your majesty may salve 
The long-grown wounds of my intemperance :
If not , the end of life cancels all bands ,
And I will die a hundred thousand deaths 
Ere break the smallest parcel of this vow .

A hundred thousand rebels die in this :
Thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein .

How now , good Blunt ! thy looks are full of speed .

So hath the business that I come to speak of .
Lord Mortimer of Scotland hath sent word 
That Douglas and the English rebels met ,
The eleventh of this month at Shrewsbury .
A mighty and a fearful head they are ,
If promises be kept on every hand ,
As ever offer'd foul play in a state .

The Earl of Westmoreland set forth to-day ,
With him my son , Lord John of Lancaster ;
For this advertisement is five days old .
On Wednesday next , Harry , you shall set forward ;
On Thursday we ourselves will march : our meeting 
Is Bridgenorth ; and Harry , you shall march 
Through Gloucestershire ; by which account ,
Our business valued , some twelve days hence 
Our general forces at Bridgenorth shall meet .
Our hands are full of business : let's away ;
Advantage feeds him fat while men delay .


Bardolph , am I not fallen away vilely since this last action ? do I not bate ? do I not dwindle ? Why , my skin hangs about me like an old lady's loose gown ; I am withered like an old apple-john . Well , I'll repent , and that suddenly , while I am in some liking ; I shall be out of heart shortly , and then I shall have no strength to repent . An I have not forgotten what the inside of a church is made of , I am a peppercorn , a brewer's horse : the inside of a church ! Company , villanous company , hath been the spoil of me .

Sir John , you are so fretful , you cannot live long .

Why , there is it : come , sing me a bawdy song ; make me merry . I was as virtuously given as a gentleman need to be ; virtuous enough : swore little ; diced not above seven times a week ; went to a bawdy-house not above once in a quarter of an hour ; paid money that I borrowed three or four times ; lived well and in good compass ; and now I live out of all order , out of all compass .

Why , you are so fat , Sir John , that you must needs be out of all compass , out of all reasonable compass , Sir John .

Do thou amend thy face , and I'll amend my life : thou art our admiral , thou bearest the lanthorn in the poop , but 'tis in the nose of thee : thou art the Knight of the Burning Lamp .

Why , Sir John , my face does you no harm .

No , I'll be sworn ; I make as good use of it as many a man doth of a Death's head , or a memento mori : I never see thy face but I think upon hell-fire and Dives that lived in purple ; for there he is in his robes , burning , burning . If thou wert any way given to virtue , I would swear by thy face ; my oath should be , 'By this fire , that's God's angel :' but thou art altogether given over , and wert indeed , but for the light in thy face , the son of utter darkness . When thou rannest up Gadshill in the night to catch my horse , if I did not think thou hadst been an igius fatuus or a ball of wildfire , there's no purchase in money . O ! thou art a perpetual triumph , an everlasting bonfire-light . Thou hast saved me a thousand marks in links and torches , walking with thee in the night betwixt tavern and tavern : but the sack that thou hast drunk me would have bought me lights as good cheap at the dearest chandler's in Europe . I have maintained that salamander of yours with fire any time this two-and-thirty years ; God reward me for it !

'Sblood , I would my face were in your belly .

God-a-mercy ! so should I be sure to be heart-burned .

How now , Dame Partlet the hen ! have you inquired yet who picked my pocket ?

Why , Sir John , what do you think , Sir John ? Do you think I keep thieves in my house ? I have searched , I have inquired , so has my husband , man by man , boy by boy , servant by servant : the tithe of a hair was never lost in my house before .

You lie , hostess : Bardolph was shaved and lost many a hair ; and I'll be sworn my pocket was picked . Go to , you are a woman ; go .

Who , I ? No ; I defy thee : God's light !
I was never called so in my own house before .

Go to , I know you well enough .

No , Sir John ; you do not know me , Sir John : I know you , Sir John : you owe me money , Sir John , and now you pick a quarrel to beguile me of it : I bought you a dozen of shirts to your back .

Dowlas , filthy dowlas : I have given them away to bakers' wives , and they have made bolters of them .

Now , as I am true woman , holland of eight shillings an ell . You owe money here besides , Sir John , for your diet and by-drinkings , and money lent you , four-and-twenty pound .

He had his part of it ; let him pay .

He ! alas ! he is poor ; he hath nothing .

How ! poor ? look upon his face ; what call you rich ? let them coin his nose , let them coin his cheeks . I'll not pay a denier . What ! will you make a younker of me ? shall I not take mine ease in mine inn but I shall have my pocket picked ? I have lost a seal-ring of my grandfather's worth forty mark .

O Jesu ! I have heard the prince tell him , I know not how oft , that that ring was copper .

How ! the prince is a Jack , a sneak-cup ; 'sblood ! an he were here , I would cudgel him like a dog , if he would say so .


How now , lad ! is the wind in that door , i' faith ? must we all march ?

Yea , two and two , Newgate fashion .

My lord , I pray you , hear me .

What sayest thou , Mistress Quickly ?
How does thy husband ? I love him well , he is an honest man .

Good my lord , hear me .

Prithee , let her alone , and list to me .

What sayest thou , Jack ?

The other night I fell asleep here behind the arras and had my pocket picked : this house is turned bawdy-house ; they pick pockets .

What didst thou lose , Jack ?

Wilt thou believe me , Hal ? three or four bonds of forty pound a-piece , and a seal-ring of my grandfather's .

A trifle ; some eight-penny matter .

So I told him , my lord ; and I said I heard your Grace say so : and , my lord , he speaks most vilely of you , like a foul-mouthed man as he is , and said he would cudgel you .

What ! he did not ?

There's neither faith , truth , nor womanhood in me else .

There's no more faith in thee than in a stewed prune ; nor no more truth in thee than in a drawn fox ; and for womanhood , Maid Marian may be the deputy's wife of the ward to thee . Go , you thing , go .

Say , what thing ? what thing ?

What thing ! why , a thing to thank God on .

I am no thing to thank God on , I would thou shouldst know it ; I am an honest man's wife ; and , setting thy knighthood aside , thou art a knave to call me so .

Setting thy womanhood aside , thou art a beast to say otherwise .

Say , what beast , thou knave thou ?

What beast ! why , an otter .

An otter , Sir John ! why , an otter ?

Why ? she's neither fish nor flesh ; a man knows not where to have her .

Thou art an unjust man in saying so : thou or any man knows where to have me , thou knave thou !

Thou sayest true , hostess ; and he slanders thee most grossly .

So he doth you , my lord ; and said this other day you ought him a thousand pound .

Sirrah ! do I owe you a thousand pound ?

A thousand pound , Hal ! a million : thy love is worth a million ; thou owest me thy love .

Nay , my lord , he called you Jack , and said he would cudgel you .

Did I , Bardolph ?

Indeed , Sir John , you said so .

Yea ; if he said my ring was copper .

I say 'tis copper : darest thou be as good as thy word now ?

Why , Hal , thou knowest , as thou art but man , I dare ; but as thou art prince , I fear thee as I fear the roaring of the lion s whelp .

And why not as the lion ?

The king himself is to be feared as the lion : dost thou think I'll fear thee as I fear thy father ? nay , an I do , I pray God my girdle break !

O ! if it should , how would thy guts fall about thy knees . But , sirrah , there's no room for faith , truth , or honesty in this bosom of thine ; it is all filled up with guts and midriff . Charge an honest woman with picking thy pocket ! Why , thou whoreson , impudent , embossed rascal , if there were any thing in thy pocket but tavern reckonings , memorandums of bawdy-houses , and one poor pennyworth of sugar-candy to make thee long-winded ; if thy pocket were enriched with any other injuries but these , I am a villain . And yet you will stand to it , you will not pocket up wrong . Art thou not ashamed ?

Dost thou hear , Hal ? thou knowest in the state of innocency Adam fell ; and what should poor Jack Falstaff do in the days of villany ? Thou seest I have more flesh than another man , and therefore more frailty . You confess then , you picked my pocket ?

It appears so by the story .

Hostess , I forgive thee . Go make ready breakfast ; love thy husband , look to thy servants , cherish thy guests : thou shalt find me tractable to any honest reason : thou seest I am pacified . Still ! Nay prithee , be gone .

Now , Hal , to the news at court : for the robbery , lad , how is that answered ?

O ! my sweet beef , I must still be good angel to thee : the money is paid back again .

O ! I do not like that paying back ; 'tis a double labour .

I am good friends with my father and may do anything .

Rob me the exchequer the first thing thou dost , and do it with unwashed hands too .

Do , my lord .

I have procured thee , Jack , a charge of foot .

I would it had been of horse . Where shall I find one that can steal well ? O ! for a fine thief , of the age of two-and-twenty , or thereabouts ; I am heinously unprovided . Well , God be thanked for these rebels ; they offend none but the virtuous : I laud them , I praise them .

Bardolph !

My lord ?

Go bear this letter to Lord John of Lancaster ,
To my brother John ; this to my Lord of Westmoreland .
Go , Poins , to horse , to horse ! for thou and I 
Have thirty miles to ride ere dinner-time .
Jack , meet me to-morrow in the Temple-hall 
At two o'clock in the afternoon :
There shalt thou know thy charge , and there receive 
Money and order for their furniture .
The land is burning ; Percy stands on high ;
And either we or they must lower lie .


Rare words ! brave world ! Hostess , my breakfast ; come !
O ! I could wish this tavern were my drum .

Well said , my noble Scot : if speaking truth 
In this fine age were not thought flattery ,
Such attribution should the Douglas have ,
As not a soldier of this season's stamp 
Should go so general current through the world .
By God , I cannot flatter ; do defy 
The tongues of soothers ; but a braver place 
In my heart's love hath no man than yourself .
Nay , task me to my word ; approve me , lord .

Thou art the king of honour :
No man so potent breathes upon the ground 
But I will beard him .

Do so , and 'tis well .


What letters hast thou there ?


I can but thank you .

These letters come from your father .

Letters from him ! why comes he not himself ?

He cannot come , my lord : he's grievous sick .

'Zounds ! how has he the leisure to be sick 
In such a justling time ? Who leads his power ?
Under whose government come they along ?

His letters bear his mind , not I , my lord .

I prithee , tell me , doth he keep his bed ?

He did , my lord , four days ere I set forth ;
And at the time of my departure thence 
He was much fear'd by his physicians .

I would the state of time had first been whole 
Ere he by sickness had been visited :
His health was never better worth than now .

Sick now ! droop now ! this sickness doth infect 
The very life-blood of our enterprise ;
'Tis catching hither , even to our camp ,
He writes me here , that inward sickness 
And that his friends by deputation could not 
So soon be drawn ; nor did he think it meet 
To lay so dangerous and dear a trust 
On any soul remov'd but on his own .
Yet doth he give us bold advertisement ,
That with our small conjunction we should on ,
To see how fortune is dispos'd to us ;
For , as he writes , there is no quailing now ,
Because the king is certainly possess'd 
Of all our purposes . What say you to it ?

Your father's sickness is a maim to us .

A perilous gash , a very limb lopp'd off :
And yet , in faith , 'tis not ; his present want 
Seems more than we shall find it . Were it good 
To set the exact wealth of all our states 
All at one cast ? to set so rich a main 
On the nice hazard of one doubtful hour ?
It were not good ; for therein should we read 
The very bottom and the soul of hope ,
The very list , the very utmost bound 
Of all our fortunes .

Faith , and so we should ;
Where now remains a sweet reversion :
We may boldly spend upon the hope of what 
Is to come in :
A comfort of retirement lives in this .

A rendezvous , a home to fly unto ,
If that the devil and mischance look big 
Upon the maidenhead of our affairs .

But yet , I would your father had been here .
The quality and hair of our attempt 
Brooks no division . It will be thought 
By some , that know not why he is away ,
That wisdom , loyalty , and mere dislike 
Of our proceedings , kept the earl from hence .
And think how such an apprehension 
May turn the tide of fearful faction 
And breed a kind of question in our cause ;
For well you know we of the offering side 
Must keep aloof from strict arbitrement ,
And stop all sight-holes , every loop from whence 
The eye of reason may pry in upon us :
This absence of your father's draws a curtain ,
That shows the ignorant a kind of fear 
Before not dreamt of .

You strain too far .
I rather of his absence make this use :
It lends a lustre and more great opinion ,
A larger dare to our great enterprise ,
Than if the earl were here ; for men must think ,
If we without his help , can make a head 
To push against the kingdom , with his help 
We shall o'erturn it topsy-turvy down .
Yet all goes well , yet all our joints are whole .

As heart can think : there is not such a word 
Spoke of in Scotland as this term of fear .


My cousin Vernon ! welcome , by my soul .

Pray God my news be worth a welcome , lord .
The Earl of Westmoreland , seven thousand strong ,
Is marching hitherwards ; with him Prince John .

No harm : what more ?

And further , I have learn'd ,
The king himself in person is set forth ,
Or hitherwards intended speedily ,
With strong and mighty preparation .

He shall be welcome too . Where is his son ,
The nimble-footed madcap Prince of Wales ,
And his comrades , that daff'd the world aside ,
And bid it pass ?

All furnish'd , all in arms ,
All plum'd like estridges that wing the wind ,
Baited like eagles having lately bath'd ,
Glittering in golden coats , like images ,
As full of spirit as the month of May ,
And gorgeous as the sun at midsummer ,
Wanton as youthful goats , wild as young bulls .
I saw young Harry , with his beaver on ,
His cushes on his thighs , gallantly arm'd ,
Rise from the ground like feather'd Mercury ,
And vaulted with such ease into his seat ,
As if an angel dropp'd down from the clouds ,
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus 
And witch the world with noble horsemanship .

No more , no more : worse than the sun in March 
This praise doth nourish agues . Let them come ;
They come like sacrifices in their trim ,
And to the fire-ey'd maid of smoky war 
All hot and bleeding will we offer them :
The mailed Mars shall on his altar sit 
Up to the ears in blood . I am on fire 
To hear this rich reprisal is so nigh 
And yet not ours . Come , let me taste my horse ,
Who is to bear me like a thunderbolt 
Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales :
Harry to Harry shall , hot horse to horse ,
Meet and ne'er part till one drop down a corse .
O ! that Glendower were come .

There is more news :
I learn'd in Worcester , as I rode along ,
He cannot draw his power these fourteen days .

That's the worst tidings that I hear of yet .

Ay , by my faith , that bears a frosty sound .

What may the king's whole battle reach unto ?

To thirty thousand .

Forty let it be :
My father and Glendower being both away ,
The powers of us may serve so great a day .
Come , let us take a muster speedily :
Doomsday is near ; die all , die merrily .

Talk not of dying : I am out of fear 
Of death or death's hand for this one half year .


Bardolph , get thee before to Coventry ; fill me a bottle of sack : our soldiers shall march through : we'll to Sutton-Co'fil' to-night .

Will you give me money , captain ?

Lay out , lay out .

This bottle makes an angel .

An if it do , take it for thy labour ; and if it make twenty , take them all , I'll answer the coinage . Bid my Lieutenant Peto meet me at the town's end .

I will , captain : farewell .


If I be not ashamed of my soldiers , I am a soused gurnet . I have misused the king's press damnably . I have got , in exchange of a hundred and fifty soldiers , three hundred and odd pounds . I press me none but good householders , yeomen's sons ; inquire me out contracted bachelors , such as had been asked twice on the banns ; such a commodity of warm slaves , as had as lief hear the devil as a drum ; such as fear the report of a caliver worse than a struck fowl or a hurt wild-duck . I pressed me none but such toasts-and-butter , with hearts in their bellies no bigger than pins' heads , and they have bought out their services ; and now my whole charge consists of ancients , corporals , lieutenants , gentlemen of companies , slaves as ragged as Lazarus in the painted cloth , where the glutton's dogs licked his sores ; and such as indeed were never soldiers , but discarded unjust serving-men , younger sons to younger brothers , revolted tapsters and ostlers trade-fallen , the cankers of a calm world and a long peace ; ten times more dishonourable ragged than an old faced ancient : and such have I , to fill up the rooms of them that have bought out their services , that you would think that I had a hundred and fifty tattered prodigals , lately come from swine-keeping , from eating draff and husks . A mad fellow met me on the way and told me I had unloaded all the gibbets and pressed the dead bodies . No eye hath seen such scarecrows . I'll not march through Coventry with them , that's flat : nay , and the villains march wide betwixt the legs , as if they had gyves on ; for , indeed I had the most of them out of prison . There's but a shirt and a half in all my company ; and the half shirt is two napkins tacked together and thrown over the shoulders like a herald's coat without sleeves ; and the shirt , to say the truth , stolen from my host at Saint Alban's , or the red-nose inn-keeper of Daventry . But that's all one ; they'll find linen enough on every hedge .


How now , blown Jack ! how now , quilt !

What , Hal ! How now , mad wag ! what a devil dost thou in Warwickshire ? My good Lord of Westmoreland , I cry you mercy : I thought your honour had already been at Shrewsbury .

Faith , Sir John , 'tis more than time that I were there , and you too ; but my powers are there already . The king , I can tell you , looks for us all : we must away all night .

Tut , never fear me : I am as vigilant as a cat to steal cream .

I think to steal cream indeed , for thy theft hath already made thee butter . But tell me , Jack , whose fellows are these that come after ?

Mine , Hal , mine .

I did never see such pitiful rascals .

Tut , tut ; good enough to toss ; food for powder , food for powder ; they'll fill a pit as well as better : tush , man , mortal men , mortal men .

Ay , but , Sir John , methinks they are exceeding poor and bare ; too beggarly .

Faith , for their poverty , I know not where they had that ; and for their bareness , I am sure they never learned that of me .

No , I'll be sworn ; unless you call three fingers on the ribs bare . But sirrah , make haste : Percy is already in the field .

What , is the king encamped ?

He is , Sir John : I fear we shall stay too long .

Well ,
To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feast 
Fits a dull fighter and a keen guest .


We'll fight with him to-night .

It may not be .

You give him then advantage .

Not a whit .

Why say you so ? looks he not for supply ?

So do we .

His is certain , ours is doubtful .

Good cousin , be advis'd : stir not to-night .

Do not , my lord .

You do not counsel well :
You speak it out of fear and cold heart .

Do me no slander , Douglas : by my life ,
And I dare well maintain it with my life ,
If well-respected honour bid me on ,
I hold as little counsel with weak fear 
As you , my lord , or any Scot that this day lives :
Let it be seen to-morrow in the battle 
Which of us fears .

Yea , or to-night .

Content .

To-night , say I .

Come , come , it may not be . I wonder much ,
Being men of such great leading as you are ,
That you foresee not what impediments 
Drag back our expedition : certain horse 
Of my cousin Vernon's are not yet come up :
Your uncle Worcester's horse came but to-day ;
And now their pride and mettle is asleep ,
Their courage with hard labour tame and dull ,
That not a horse is half the half of himself .

So are the horses of the enemy 
In general , journey-bated and brought low :
The better part of ours are full of rest .

The number of the king exceedeth ours :
For God's sake , cousin , stay till all come in .

I come with gracious offers from the king ,
If you vouchsafe me hearing and respect .

Welcome , Sir Walter Blunt ; and would to God 
You were of our determination !
Some of us love you well ; and even those some 
Envy your great deservings and good name ,
Because you are not of our quality ,
But stand against us like an enemy .

And God defend but still I should stand so ,
So long as out of limit and true rule 
You stand against anointed majesty .
But , to my charge . The king hath sent to know 
The nature of your griefs , and whereupon 
You conjure from the breast of civil peace 
Such bold hostility , teaching his duteous land 
Audacious cruelty . If that the king 
Have any way your good deserts forgot ,
Which he confesseth to be manifold ,
He bids you name your griefs ; and with all speed 
You shall have your desires with interest ,
And pardon absolute for yourself and these 
Herein misled by your suggestion .

The king is kind ; and well we know the king 
Knows at what time to promise , when to pay .
My father and my uncle and myself 
Did give him that same royalty he wears ;
And when he was not six-and-twenty strong ,
Sick in the world's regard , wretched and low ,
A poor unminded outlaw sneaking home ,
My father gave him welcome to the shore ;
And when he heard him swear and vow to God 
He came but to be Duke of Lancaster ,
To sue his livery and beg his peace ,
With tears of innocency and terms of zeal ,
My father , in kind heart and pity mov'd ,
Swore him assistance and perform'd it too .
Now when the lords and barons of the realm 
Perceiv'd Northumberland did lean to him ,
The more and less came in with cap and knee ;
Met him in boroughs , cities , villages ,
Attended him on bridges , stood in lanes ,
Laid gifts before him , proffer'd him their oaths ,
Gave him their heirs as pages , follow'd him 
Even at the heels in golden multitudes .
He presently , as greatness knows itself ,
Steps me a little higher than his vow 
Made to my father , while his blood was poor ,
Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurgh ;
And now , forsooth , takes on him to reform 
Some certain edicts and some strait decrees 
That lie too heavy on the commonwealth ,
Cries out upon abuses , seems to weep 
Over his country's wrongs ; and by this face ,
This seeming brow of justice , did he win 
The hearts of all that he did angle for ;
Proceeded further ; cut me off the heads 
Of all the favourites that the absent king 
In deputation left behind him here ,
When he was personal in the Irish war .

Tut , I came not to hear this .

Then to the point .
In short time after , he depos'd the king ;
Soon after that , depriv'd him of his life ;
And , in the neck of that , task'd the whole state ;
To make that worse , suffer'd his kinsman March 
Who is , if every owner were well plac'd ,
Indeed his king to be engag'd in Wales ,
There without ransom to lie forfeited ;
Disgrac'd me in my happy victories ;
Sought to entrap me by intelligence ;
Rated my uncle from the council-board ;
In rage dismiss'd my father from the court ;
Broke oath on oath , committed wrong on wrong ;
And in conclusion drove us to seek out 
This head of safety ; and withal to pry 
Into his title , the which we find 
Too indirect for long continuance .

Shall I return this answer to the king ?

Not so , Sir Walter : we'll withdraw awhile .
Go to the king ; and let there be impawn'd 
Some surety for a safe return again ,
And in the morning early shall my uncle 
Bring him our purposes ; and so farewell .

I would you would accept of grace and love .

And may be so we shall .

Pray God , you do !


Hie , good Sir Michael ; bear this sealed brief 
With winged haste to the lord marshal ;
This to my cousin Scroop , and all the rest 
To whom they are directed . If you knew 
How much they do import , you would make haste .

My good lord ,
I guess their tenour .

Like enough you do .
To-morrow , good Sir Michael , is a day 
Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men 
Must bide the touch ; for , sir , at Shrewsbury ,
As I am truly given to understand ,
The king with mighty and quick-raised power 
Meets with Lord Harry : and , I fear , Sir Michael ,
What with the sickness of Northumberland ,
Whose power was in the first proportion ,
And what with Owen Glendower's absence thence ,
Who with them was a rated sinew too ,
And comes not in , o'er-rul'd by prophecies ,
I fear the power of Percy is too weak 
To wage an instant trial with the king .

Why , my good lord , you need not fear :
There is the Douglas and Lord Mortimer .

No , Mortimer is not there .

But there is Mordake , Vernon , Lord Harry Percy ,
And there's my Lord of Worcester , and a head 
Of gallant warriors , noble gentlemen .

And so there is ; but yet the king hath drawn 
The special head of all the land together :
The Prince of Wales , Lord John of Lancaster ,
The noble Westmoreland , and war-like Blunt ;
And many moe corrivals and dear men 
Of estimation and command in arms .

Doubt not , my lord , they shall be well oppos'd .

I hope no less , yet needful 'tis to fear ;
And , to prevent the worse , Sir Michael , speed :
For if Lord Percy thrive not , ere the king 
Dismiss his power , he means to visit us ,
For he hath heard of our confederacy ,
And 'tis but wisdom to make strong against him :
Therefore make haste . I must go write again 
To other friends ; and so farewell , Sir Michael .

How bloodily the sun begins to peer 
Above yon busky hill ! the day looks pale 
At his distemperature .

The southern wind 
Doth play the trumpet to his purposes ,
And by his hollow whistling in the leaves 
Foretells a tempest and a blustering day .

Then with the losers let it sympathize ,
For nothing can seem foul to those that win .

How now , my Lord of Worcester ! 'tis not well 
That you and I should meet upon such terms 
As now we meet . You have deceiv'd our trust ,
And made us doff our easy robes of peace ,
To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel :
This is not well , my lord ; this is not well .
What say you to it ? will you again unknit 
This churlish knot of all-abhorred war ,
And move in that obedient orb again 
Where you did give a fair and natural light ,
And be no more an exhal'd meteor ,
A prodigy of fear and a portent 

Of broached mischief to the unborn times ?

Hear me , my liege .
For mine own part , I could be well content 
To entertain the lag-end of my life 
With quiet hours ; for I do protest 
I have not sought the day of this dislike .

You have not sought it ! how comes it then ?

Rebellion lay in his way , and he found it .

Peace , chewet , peace !

It pleas'd your majesty to turn your looks 
Of favour from myself and all our house ;
And yet I must remember you , my lord ,
We were the first and dearest of your friends .
For you my staff of office did I break 
In Richard's time ; and posted day and night 
To meet you on the way , and kiss your hand ,
When yet you were in place and in account 
Nothing so strong and fortunate as I .
It was myself , my brother , and his son ,
That brought you home and boldly did outdare 
The dangers of the time . You swore to us ,
And you did swear that oath at Doncaster ,
That you did nothing purpose 'gainst the state ,
Nor claim no further than your new-fall'n right ,
The seat of Gaunt , dukedom of Lancaster .
To this we swore our aid : but , in short space 
It rain'd down fortune showering on your head ,
And such a flood of greatness fell on you ,
What with our help , what with the absent king ,
What with the injuries of a wanton time ,
The seeming sufferances that you had borne ,
And the contrarious winds that held the king 
So long in his unlucky Irish wars ,
That all in England did repute him dead :
And from this swarm of fair advantages 
You took occasion to be quickly woo'd 
To gripe the general sway into your hand ;
Forgot your oath to us at Doncaster ;
And being fed by us you us'd us so 
As that ungentle gull , the cuckoo's bird ,
Useth the sparrow : did oppress our nest ,
Grew by our feeding to so great a bulk 
That even our love durst not come near your sight 
For fear of swallowing ; but with nimble wing 
We were enforc'd , for safety's sake , to fly 
Out of your sight and raise this present head ;
Whereby we stand opposed by such means 
As you yourself have forg'd against yourself 
By unkind usage , dangerous countenance ,
And violation of all faith and troth 
Sworn to us in your younger enterprise .

These things indeed , you have articulate ,
Proclaim'd at market-crosses , read in churches ,
To face the garment of rebellion 
With some fine colour that may please the eye 
Of fickle changelings and poor discontents ,
Which gape and rub the elbow at the news 
Of hurlyburly innovation :
And never yet did insurrection want 
Such water-colours to impaint his cause ;
Nor moody beggars , starving for a time 
Of pell-mell havoc and confusion .

In both our armies there is many a soul 
Shall pay full dearly for this encounter ,
If once they join in trial . Tell your nephew ,
The Prince of Wales doth join with all the world 
In praise of Henry Percy : by my hopes ,
This present enterprise set off his head ,
I do not think a braver gentleman ,
More active-valiant or more valiant-young ,
More daring or more bold , is now alive 
To grace this latter age with noble deeds .
For my part , I may speak it to my shame ,
I have a truant been to chivalry ;
And so I hear he doth account me too ;
Yet this before my father's majesty 
I am content that he shall take the odds 
Of his great name and estimation ,
And will , to save the blood on either side ,
Try fortune with him in a single fight .

And , Prince of Wales , so dare we venture thee ,
Albeit considerations infinite 
Do make against it . No , good Worcester , no ,
We love our people well ; even those we love 
That are misled upon your cousin's part ;
And , will they take the offer of our grace ,
Both he and they and you , yea , every man 
Shall be my friend again , and I'll be his .
So tell your cousin , and bring me word 
What he will do ; but if he will not yield ,
Rebuke and dread correction wait on us ,
And they shall do their office . So , be gone :
We will not now be troubled with reply ;
We offer fair , take it advisedly .


It will not be accepted , on my life .
The Douglas and the Hotspur both together 
Are confident against the world in arms .

Hence , therefore , every leader to his charge ;
For , on their answer , will we set on them ;
And God befriend us , as our cause is just !


Hal , if thou see me down in the battle , and bestride me , so ; 'tis a point of friendship .

Nothing but a colossus can do thee that friendship . Say thy prayers , and farewell .

I would it were bed-time , Hal , and all well .

Why , thou owest God a death .


'Tis not due yet : I would be loath to pay him before his day . What need I be so forward with him that calls not on me ? Well , 'tis no matter ; honour pricks me on . Yea , but how if honour prick me off when I come on ? how then ? Can honour set to a leg ? No . Or an arm ? No . Or take away the grief of a wound ? No . Honour hath no skill in surgery then ? No . What is honour ? a word . What is that word , honour ? Air . A trim reckoning ! Who hath it ? he that died o' Wednesday . Doth he feel it ? No . Doth he hear it ? No . It is insensible then ? Yea , to the dead . But will it not live with the living ? No . Why ? Detraction will not suffer it . Therefore I'll none of it : honour is a mere scutcheon ; and so ends my catechism .


O , no ! my nephew must not know , Sir Richard ,
The liberal kind offer of the king .

'Twere best he did .

Then are we all undone .
It is not possible , it cannot be ,
The king should keep his word in loving us ;
He will suspect us still , and find a time 
To punish this offence in other faults :
Suspicion all our lives shall be stuck full of eyes ;
For treason is but trusted like the fox ,
Who , ne'er so tame , so cherish'd , and lock'd up ,
Will have a wild trick of his ancestors .
Look how we can , or sad or merrily ,
Interpretation will misquote our looks ,
And we shall feed like oxen at a stall ,
The better cherish'd , still the nearer death .
My nephew's trespass may be well forgot ,
It hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood ;
And an adopted name of privilege ,
A hare-brain'd Hotspur , govern'd by a spleen .
All his offences live upon my head 
And on his father's : we did train him on ;
And , his corruption being ta'en from us ,
We , as the spring of all , shall pay for all .
Therefore , good cousin , let not Harry know 
In any case the offer of the king .

Deliver what you will , I'll say 'tis so .
Here comes your cousin .


My uncle is return'd : deliver up 
My Lord of Westmoreland . Uncle , what news ?

The king will bid you battle presently .

Defy him by the Lord of Westmoreland .

Lord Douglas , go you and tell him so .

Marry , and shall , and very willingly .


There is no seeming mercy in the king .

Did you beg any ? God forbid !

I told him gently of our grievances ,
Of his oath-breaking ; which he mended thus ,
By now forswearing that he is forsworn :
He calls us rebels , traitors ; and will scourge 
With haughty arms this hateful name in us .


Arm , gentlemen ! to arms ! for I have thrown 
A brave defiance in King Henry's teeth ,
And Westmoreland , that was engag'd , did bear it ;
Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on .

The Prince of Wales stepp'd forth before the king ,
And , nephew , challeng'd you to single fight .

O ! would the quarrel lay upon our heads ,
And that no man might draw short breath to-day 
But I and Harry Monmouth . Tell me , tell me ,
How show'd his tasking ? seem'd it in contempt ?

No , by my soul ; I never in my life 
Did hear a challenge urg'd more modestly ,
Unless a brother should a brother dare 
To gentle exercise and proof of arms .
He gave you all the duties of a man ,
Trimm'd up your praises with a princely tongue ,
Spoke your deservings like a chronicle ,
Making you ever better than his praise ,
By still dispraising praise valu'd with you ;
And , which became him like a prince indeed ,
He made a blushing cital of himself ,
And chid his truant youth with such a grace 
As if he master'd there a double spirit 
Of teaching and of learning instantly .
There did he pause . But let me tell the world ,
If he outlive the envy of this day ,
England did never owe so sweet a hope ,
So much misconstru'd in his wantonness .

Cousin , I think thou art enamoured 
On his follies : never did I hear 
Of any prince so wild a libertine .
But be he as he will , yet once ere night 
I will embrace him with a soldier's arm ,
That he shall shrink under my courtesy .
Arm , arm , with speed ! And , fellows , soldiers , friends ,
Better consider what you have to do ,
Than I , that have not well the gift of tongue ,
Can lift your blood up with persuasion .


My lord , here are letters for you .

I cannot read them now .
O gentlemen ! the time of life is short ;
To spend that shortness basely were too long ,
