temperatertemperaturewetherwhetherBilderBuilderBilingBilling AnalizeAnalyzePrecptationPrecipitationDiciplineDiscipline discusion discussioninterpratation interpretationTregger TriggerRelese ReleaseDiseace Disease  Dreding DreadingDisgiuse DisguiseDilema DilemmaDangerus DangerousIritating IrritatingFricton FrictionFluterFlutter  Lavandar LavenderSorow SorrowHe sounds suspicius.
He sounds suspicious.


Let’s have a cup of coffe.
Let’s have a cup of coffee.


She complited her corse.
She completed her course.

That’s very intresting.
That’s very interesting.


Do you thinc he has great knowlege.
Do you think he has great knowledge.


I sat paralell to her.
I sat parallel to her.


I’ll acheive someting one day.
I’ll achieve something one day.


He came accross me in the clob.
He came across me in the club.


Can you tel me your adress.
Can you tell me your address.


My assasination was wrogn.
My assassination was wrong.


Chers to the new beggining.
Cheers to the new beginning.


My collegue is not atentive.
My colleague is not attentive.


I had a meting with commitee yesturday.
I had a meeting with committee yesterday.


I was so concious about my suroundings.
I was so conscious about my surroundings.


I felt so embarassed in the parti yesterday.
I felt so embarrassed in the party yesterday.


She had fourty chocoletes.
She had forty chocolates.


Why do you alwais interupt me?
Why do you always interrupt me?


That was definately a bad dey.
That was definitely a bad day.


I’ll be abcent tommorow.
I’ll be absent tomorrow.


The pline was not convinient.
The plane was not convenient.


Thes is a test to c if our cheeker can find uncorrectly sapeeled words and reccomend the korect wones. 
This is a test to see if our checker can find incorrectly spelled words and recommend the correct ones.


These is an test too sea if hour checker can find contexts wrong words and recommend the correct wons.
This is a test to see if our checker can find contextually wrong words and recommend the correct ones.

This is a teest two sea if out cheek can find contexter rong words an wrongspelled words.
This is a test to see if our checker can find contextually wrong words and misspelled words.


Spelling can bee a hadr thing too leerns butt you cant learn if u tri hard enuff.
Spelling can be a hard thing to learn but you can learn if you try hard enough.
